<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Naturalism And Religion</title>
      <author><name reg="Otto, Dr. Rudolf">Dr. Rudolf Otto</name></author>
      <respStmt>
        <resp>Translated by</resp>
        <name reg="Thomson, J. Arthur">J. Arthur Thomson</name>
      </respStmt>
      <respStmt>
        <resp>Translated by</resp>
        <name reg="Thomson, Margaret R.">Margaret R. Thomson</name>
      </respStmt>
      <respStmt>
        <resp>Edited by</resp>
        <name reg="Morrison, The Rev. W. D.">The Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D.</name>
      </respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>March 27, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">31794</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-03-27">March 27, 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Naturalism And Religion</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Dr. Rudolf Otto</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Theology in the University of Göttingen</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Translated by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">J. Arthur Thomson</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Natural History in the University of Aberdeen</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">and</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Margaret R. Thomson</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Edited with an Introduction by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Rev. W. D. Morrison, LL.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Williams &amp; Norgate Ltd.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">38 Great Ormond Street, London, W.C.1</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1907</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
It is a remarkable and in some respects a disquieting
fact that whilst rival ecclesiastical parties are engaged
in a furious and embittered debate as to the precise
shade of religious instruction to be given in public
elementary schools, the thinking classes in modern
Europe are becoming more and more stirred by the
really vital question whether there is room in the
educated mind for a religious conception of the world at
all. The slow silent uninterrupted advance of research
of all kinds into nature, life, and history, has imperceptibly
but irrevocably, revolutionised our traditional
outlook upon the world, and one of the supreme
questions before the contemporary mind is the probable
issue of the great struggle now taking place between
the religious and the non-religious conception of human
life and destiny. When we look at the development of
this great fundamental conflict we feel that disputes
between rival ecclesiastical systems are of trifling
moment; the real task at the present time before every
form of religion is the task of vindicating itself before a
hostile view of life and things.
</p>

<p>
It is the consciousness of this fact which has led to
the translation and publication in English of Professor
Otto's volume. Professor Otto is well known on the
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
Continent as a thinker who possesses the rare merit of
combining a high philosophic discipline with an
accurate and comprehensive knowledge of the science of
organic nature. It is this combination of aptitudes
which has attracted so much attention to his work on
Naturalism and Religion, and which gives it a value
peculiar to itself. At a time when so much loose and
incoherent thinking exists about fundamental problems,
and when so many irrelevant claims are made, sometimes
on behalf of religion and sometimes on behalf of
hypotheses said to be resting upon science, it is a real
satisfaction to meet with such a competent guide as Dr.
Otto. Although his book is written for the general
reader, it is in reality a solid scientific contribution to
the great debate at present in progress between two
different conceptions of the ultimate nature and meaning
of things. As such it is to be hoped that it
will receive the favourable consideration which it
deserves at the hands of the English-speaking world.
</p>

<p>
W.D.M.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Religious Interpretation Of The World.</head>

<p>
The title of this book, contrasting as it does the
naturalistic and the religious interpretation of the world,
indicates that the intention of the following pages is,
in the first place, to define the relation, or rather the
antithesis, between the two; and, secondly, to endeavour
to reconcile the contradictions, and to vindicate against
the counter-claims of naturalism, the validity and freedom
of the religious outlook. In doing this it is
assumed that there is some sort of relation between the
two conceptions, and that there is a possibility of
harmonising them.
</p>

<p>
Will this be admitted? Is it not possible that the
two views are incommensurable, and would it not be
most desirable for both sides if this were so, for if there
is no logical antithesis then there can be no real antagonism?
And is not this actually the case? Surely
we have now left far behind us the primitive expressions
of the religious outlook which were concerned with the
creation of the world in six days, the making of Eve
out of Adam's rib, the story of Paradise and the
angelic and demoniacal forces, and the accessory miracles
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
and accompanying signs by means of which the Divine
control of the world was supposed to manifest itself.
We have surely learnt by this time to distinguish
between the simple mythical or legendary forms of expression
in the religious archives, and their spiritual
value and ethical content. We can give to natural
science and to religious feeling what is due to each,
and thus have done for ever with tedious apologetic
discussion.
</p>

<p>
It were well indeed if we had really attained to this!
But the relations, and therefore the possibilities of conflict
between religion and world-science, are by no means
so easily disposed of. No actually existing form of
religion is so entirely made up of <q>feeling,</q> <q>subjectivity,</q>
or <q>mood,</q> that it can dispense with all assumptions
or convictions regarding the nature and import of
the world. In fact, every form, on closer examination,
reveals a more or less fixed framework of convictions,
theoretical assumptions, and presuppositions in regard to
man, the world, and existence: that is to say, a theory,
however simple, of the universe. And this theory must
be harmonised with the conceptions of things as they
are presented to us in general world-lore, in natural and
historical science, in particular sciences, in theories of
knowledge, and perhaps in metaphysics; it must
measure itself by and with these, and draw from them
support and corroboration, and possibly also submit to
contradiction and correction.
</p>

<p>
There is no form of religion, not even the most rarefied
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
(which makes least claim because it has least content),
that does not include in itself some minute Credo,
some faith, implying attachment to a set of doctrines
and conclusions however few. And it is always necessary
to show that these conclusions are worthy of
adherence, and that they are not at variance with conclusions
and truths in regard to nature and the world
drawn from other sources. And if we consider, not the
efflorescences and artificial products of religion, but
religion itself, it is certain that there is, and always
must be, around it a borderland and fringe of religious
world-theory, with which it is not indeed identical, but
without which it is inconceivable; that is, a series of
definite and characteristic convictions relating to the
world and its existence, its meaning, its <q>whence</q> and
<q>whither</q>; to man and his intelligence, his place and
function in the world, his peculiar dignity, and his
destiny; to time and space, to infinity and eternity, and
to the depth and mystery of Being in general.
</p>

<p>
These convictions and their fundamental implications
can be defined quite clearly, both singly and as a whole,
and later we shall attempt so to define them. And it
is of the greatest importance to religion that these presuppositions
and postulates should have their legitimacy
and validity vindicated. For they are at once the
fundamental and the minimal postulates which religion
must make in its outlook on the world, which it must
make if it is to exist at all. And they are so constituted
that, even when they are released from their
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
primitive and naïve form and association, and permitted
speculative development and freedom, they must, nevertheless,
just because they contain a theory of the world,
be brought into comparison, contact, or relation of
some kind, whether hostile or friendly, with other world-conceptions
of different origin. This relation will be
hostile or friendly according to the form these other
conceptions have taken. It is impossible to imagine
any religious view of the world whose network of conceptions
can have meshes so wide, or constituents so
elastic and easily adjustable, that it will allow every
theoretical conception of nature and the world to pass
through it without violence or friction, offering to
none either let or hindrance.
</p>

<p>
It has indeed often been affirmed that religion may,
without anxiety about itself, leave scientific knowledge
of the world to go its own way. The secret
reservation in this position is always the belief that
scientific knowledge will never in any case reach the
real depth and meaning of things. Perhaps this is true.
But the assumption itself would remain, and would
have to be justified. And if religion had no other
interest in general world-theory, it would still have this
pre-eminent one, that, by defining the limitations of
scientific theory, and showing that they can never be
transcended, it thus indicates for itself a position beyond
them in which it can dwell securely. In reality religion has
never ceased to turn its never-resting, often anxious gaze
towards the progress, the changes, the secure results
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
and tentative theories in the domain of general world-science,
and again and again it has been forced to come
to a new adjustment with them.
</p>

<p>
One great centre of interest, though by no means the
only or even the chief one, lies in the special field of
world-lore and theoretical interpretation comprised in
the natural sciences. And in the following pages we
shall make this our special interest, and shall endeavour
to inquire whether our modern natural science consists
with the <q>minimal requirements</q> of the religious point
of view, with which we shall make closer acquaintance
later; or whether it is at all capable of being brought
into friendly relations with that point of view.
</p>

<p>
Such a study need not necessarily be <q>apologetic,</q>
that is to say, defensive, but may be simply an examination.
For in truth the real results of investigation
are not now and never were <q>aggressive,</q> but are in
themselves neutral towards not only religious but
all idealistic conceptions, and leave it, so to speak,
to the higher methods of study to decide how the
material supplied is to be taken up into their different
departments, and brought under their particular
points of view. Our undertaking only becomes defensive
and critical because, not from caprice or godlessness,
but, as we shall see, from an inherent necessity, the
natural sciences, in association with other convictions
and aims, tend readily to unite into a distinctive and
independent system of world-interpretation, which, if it
were valid and sufficient, would drive the religious view
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
into difficulties, or make it impossible. This independent
system is Naturalism, and against its attacks the
religious conception of the world has to stand on the
defensive.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>What is Distinctive in the Religious Outlook.</head>

<p>
At the very beginning and throughout we must keep
the following points clearly before us, otherwise all our
endeavours will only lead us astray, and be directed
towards an altogether false issue.
</p>

<p>
Firstly, everything depends and must depend upon
vindicating the validity and freedom of the religious
view of the world as contrasted with world-science in
general; but we must not attempt to derive it directly
from the latter. If religion is to live, it must be able
to demonstrate&mdash;and it can be demonstrated&mdash;that its
convictions in regard to the world and human existence
are not contradicted from any other quarter, that they
are possible and may be believed to be true. It can,
perhaps, also be shown that a calm and unprejudiced
study of nature, both physical and metaphysical reflection
on things, will supplement the interpretations of
religion, and will lend confirmation and corroboration
to many of the articles of faith already assured to it.
But it would be quite erroneous to maintain that we
must be able to read the religious conception of the
world out of nature, and that it must be, in the first instance,
derivable from nature, or that we can, not to say
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
must, regard natural knowledge as the source and basis
of the religious interpretation of the world. An
apologetic based on such an idea as this would greatly
overestimate its own strength, and not only venture too
high a stake, but would damage the cause of religion
and alter the whole position of the question. This
mistake has often been made. The old practice of
finding <q>evidences of the existence of God</q> had exactly
this tendency. It was seriously believed that one could
thereby do more than vindicate for religious conviction
a right of way in the system of knowledge. It was
seriously believed that knowledge of God could be
gained from and read out of nature, the world, and
earthly existence, and thus that the propositions of the
religious view of the world could not only gain freedom
and security, but could be fundamentally proved, and
even directly inferred from Nature in the first instance.
The strength of these evidences was greatly overestimated,
and Nature was too much studied with
reference to her harmony, her marvellous wealth and
purposeful wisdom, her significant arrangements and
endless adaptations; and too little attention was paid
to the multitudinous enigmas, to the many instances of
what seems unmeaning and purposeless, confused and
dark. People were far too ready to reason from finite
things to infinite causes, and the validity or logical
necessity of the inferences drawn was far too rarely
scrutinised. And, above all, the main point was overlooked.
For even if these <q>evidences</q> had succeeded
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
better, if they had been as sufficient as they were insufficient,
it is certain that religion and the religious
conception of the world could never have arisen from
them, but were in existence long before any such considerations
had been taken into account.
</p>

<p>
Long before these were studied, religion had arisen
from quite other sources. These sources lie deep in
the human spirit, and have had a long history. To
trace them back in detail is a special task belonging to
the domain of religious psychology, history, and philosophy,
and we cannot attempt it here, but must take it
for granted. Having arisen from these sources, religion
has long lived a life of its own, forming its own convictions
in regard to the world and existence, possessing
these as its faith and truth, basing their credibility,
and gaining for them the adherence of its followers, on
quite other grounds than those used in <q>proving the
existence of God.</q> Ideas and conclusions which have
not arisen in this way can hardly be said to be religious,
though they may resemble religious ideas. But having
thus arisen, the religious view comes into contact
with knowledge in general, and then a need for justification,
or even a state of antagonism, may arise. It
may then be asked whether convictions and ideas
which, so far, have come solely from within, and have
been affirmed and recognised as truths only by heart
and conscience, can possibly be adhered to in the face
of the insight afforded by an investigation and scientific
knowledge of nature.
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
Let us take an example, and at once the highest that
can be found. The religious recognition of the sway of
an eternal Providence cannot possibly be directly
derived from, or proved by, any consideration of nature
and history. If we had not had it already, no apologetic
and no evidences of the existence of God would
have given it to us. The task of an apologetic which
knows its limitations and its true aims can only be to
inquire whether there is scope and freedom left for
these religious ideas alongside of our natural knowledge
of the world; to show that the latter, because of its
proper limitations, has no power to make a pronouncement
in regard to the highest meaning of the world;
and to point to certain indications in nature and history
that justify us in interpreting the whole in terms of
purpose and ultimate import. This is the case with all
the conceptions and conclusions of the religious view of
the world. No single one of them can be really proved
from a study of nature, because they are much too deep
to be reached by ordinary reasoning, and much too
peculiar in their character and content to be discovered
by any scientific consideration of nature or interpretation
of the world. It is, however, at the same time
obvious that all apologetic must follow religion, and
can never precede it. Religion can only be awakened,
never coerced. Once awakened, it can reflect on its
validity and freedom; but it alone can really understand
both. And apart from religion, or without its
presence, all apologetic endeavours are gratuitous, and
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
are, moreover, expressly forbidden by its own highest
authorities (Matt. xxiii. 15).
</p>

<p>
The second point is even more important. Religion
does not hold its theory of the world and its interpretations
of the nature and meaning of things in the
same way as poetry does its fine-spun, airy dreams,
whose chief value lies in the fact that they call up
moods and arouse a play of feeling, and which may be
grave or gay, elegiac or idyllic, charming or sublime,
but may be true or false indifferently.
</p>

<p>
For there is this outstanding difference between
religion and all <q>moods</q>&mdash;all poetic or fanciful views
of nature&mdash;that it lives by the certainty of its ideas,
suffers if they be uncertain, and dies if they be shown
to be untenable, however charming or consoling, sublime
or simple they may be. Its theories of the world are
not poems; they are convictions, and these require to
be first of all not pleasing but true. (Hence it is that
criticism may arise out of religion itself, since religion
seeks for its own sake to find secure foundations.) And
in this respect the religious conception of the world is
quite in line with world-theory in general. Both desire
to express reality. They do not wish to lay gaily-coloured
wreaths and garlands about reality that they
may enjoy it, plunged in their respective moods; they
desire to understand it and give an account of it.
</p>

<p>
But there is at once apparent a characteristic difference
between the propositions and conclusions of the
religious view and those of the secular, a difference not
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
so much of content, which goes without saying, but in
the whole form, manner and method, and tone. As
Schleiermacher put it: <q>You can never say that it
advances with the sure tread</q> of which science in
general is capable, and by which it is recognisable.
The web of religious certainty is much more finely and
delicately woven, and more susceptible of injury than
the more robust one of ordinary knowledge. Moreover,
where religious certainty has attained its highest point
in a believing mind, and is greater rather than less than
the certainty of what is apprehended by the senses or
experienced day by day, this characteristic difference is
most easily discerned. The believer is probably much
more confident about <q>the care of his Heavenly Father,</q>
or <q>the life eternal,</q> than he is about this life with its
varying and insignificant experiences and content. For
he knows about the life beyond in quite a different way.
The truths of the religious outlook cannot be put on
the same level as those of ordinary and everyday life.
And when the mind passes from one to the other it does
so with the consciousness that the difference is in kind.
The knowledge of God and eternity, and the real value,
transcending space and time, of our own inner being,
cannot even in form be mixed up with the trivial truths
of the normal human understanding or the conclusions
of science. In fact, the truths of religion exhibit, in
quite a special way, the character of all ideal truths,
which are not really true for every day at all, but are
altogether bound up with exalted states of feeling. This
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
is expressed in the old phrase, <q>Deus non scitur sed
creditur</q> [God is not known but believed in]. For the
Sorbonne was quite right and protected one of the
essential interests of religion, when it rejected as heresy
the contrary position, that it was possible to <q>know</q>
God. Thus, in the way in which I <q>know</q> that I am
sitting at this writing-table, or that it rained yesterday,
or that the sum of the angles in a triangle are equal to
two right angles, I can know nothing of God. But I
can know of Him something in the way in which I know
that to tell the truth is right, that to keep faith is
duty, propositions which are certain and which state
something real and valid, but which I could not have
arrived at without conscious consent, and a certain
exaltation of spirit on my own part. This, and especially
the second part of it, holds true in an increased
degree of all religious conceptions. They weave themselves
together out of the most inward and subtle
experiences, out of impressions which are coarsened in
the very act of expressing them. Their import and
value must be judged entirely by the standards of
conscience and feeling, by their own self-sufficiency and
validity. The best part of them lies in the intensity
and vitality of their experience, and in the spontaneous
acceptance and recognition which they receive. They
cannot be apprehended by the prosaic, secular mind;
whatever is thus apprehended is at most an indifferent
analogue of religious experience, if it is not self-deception.
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
It is only in exaltation, in quiet enthusiasm, that
religious feelings can come to life and become pervasive,
and religious truth can only become a possession available
for everyday use in proportion as it is possible to
make this non-secular and exalted state of mind permanent,
and to maintain enthusiasm as the enduring mood
of life and conduct. And as this is capable of all
degrees of intensity from overpowering outbursts and
isolated raptures to a gentle but permanent tension and
elevation of spirit, so also is the certainty and actuality
of our knowledge, whether of the sway of the divine
power, or of our own higher nature and destiny, or of
any religious truth whatever. This is what is meant
by St. Paul's <q>Praying without ceasing</q> and his
<q>Being in the Spirit</q> as a permanent mood; and herein
lies the justification of the statement of enthusiasm that
truth is only found in moments of ecstasy. In fact,
religion and religious interpretations are nothing if not
<q>enthusiasms,</q> that is to say, expressions of the art of
sustaining a permanent exaltation of spirit. And any
one who is not capable of this inward exaltation, or is
too little capable of it, is badly qualified for either
religion or religious outlook. The <q>enthusiasts</q> will
undoubtedly make a better figure in the <q>kingdom of
God,</q> as well as find an easier entrance therein, than
the prosaic matter-of-fact people.
</p>

<p>
This is really the source of much that is vexatious in
all apologetic efforts, and indeed in all theorising about
religion, as soon as we attempt to get beyond the
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
periphery into the heart of the matter. For in order
to understand the subject at all a certain amount of
<q>enthusiasm</q> is necessary, and in most cases the disputants
fail to reach common ground because this
enthusiasm is lacking in one or both. If they both have
it, in that case also dialectics are out of the question.
</p>

<p>
Finally, it must be remarked that, as Luther puts it,
<q>Faith always goes against appearances.</q> The religious
conception of the world not only never grows directly
out of a scientific and general study of things, but it
can never be brought into absolute congruence with
it. There are endless tracts and domains of the
world, in nature and history, which we cannot
bring under the religious consideration at all, because
they admit of no interpretation from the higher or
more general points of view; they lie before us as
everlasting unrelated mysteries, uncomprehended as to
their import and purpose. Moreover, the religious
theory of the world can never tell us, or wish to tell us,
what the world is as a whole, or what is the meaning of
its being. It is enough for us that it throws light on
our own being, and reveals to us our place and destiny,
and the meaning of our existence. It is enough if, in
this respect, reality adapts itself to the interpretations
of religion, admits of their truth and allows them scope,
and corroborates them in important ways and instances.
It actually does this, and it can be demonstrated that
it does. And in demonstrating this the task of an
apologetic that knows its own limitations alone consists.
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
It must be aware that it will succeed even in this, only
if it is supported by a courageous will to believe and joy
in believing, that many gaps and a thousand riddles will
remain, that the ultimate and highest condition of the
search after a world-interpretation is personal decision
and personal choice, which finally depends upon <q>what
manner of man one is.</q> Faith has always meant going
against appearances. It has gone against them not
from obstinacy or incorrigible lack of understanding,
but because it has had strong reasons, impossible to set
aside, for regarding appearances literally as appearances.
It has suffered from the apparent, often even to the
point of extinction, and has again drawn from it and
from its opposition its highest strength. That they
overmastered appearances made of the heroes of faith
the greatest of all heroes. And thus religion lives by
the very riddles which have frequently caused its death,
and they are a part of its inheritance and constitution.
To work continually towards their solution is a task
which it will never give up. Until success has been
achieved, it is of importance to show, that what comes
into conflict with faith in these riddles at the present
day is not something new and previously unheard of.
In cases where faith has died because of them we almost
invariably find the opinion that religion might have been
possible in earlier and more naïve times, but that it is no
longer possible to us, with our deeper insight into the
dark mystery of nature and destiny. This is foolishness.
When faith dies thus, it dies of one of its infantile
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
diseases. For from the tragedies of Job and of Jeremiah
to the Tower of Siloam and the horror of the Mont-Pelée
eruption there runs a direct lineage of the same
perennial riddle. Well-developed religion has never
existed without this&mdash;at once its shadow and its touchstone.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Naturalism.</head>

<p>
Naturalism is not of to-day or of yesterday, but is very
ancient,&mdash;as old, indeed, as philosophy,&mdash;as old as human
thought and doubt. Indeed, we may say that it almost
invariably played its part whenever man began to reflect
on the whence and the how of the actual world around
him. In the philosophical systems of Leucippus and
Democritus and Epicurus it lies fully developed before us.
It persisted as a latent and silently dreaded antagonist,
even in times when <q>orthodox</q> anti-naturalistic and
super-naturalistic systems were the officially prevailing
ones, and were to all appearance generally adhered to.
So in the more modern systems of materialism and
positivism, in the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Système de la nature</foreign>
and in the theory of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>l'homme machine</foreign>, in the
materialistic reactions from
the idealistic nature-speculations of Schelling and Hegel,
in the discussions of materialism in the past century, in
the naturalistic writings of Moleschott, Czolbe, Vogt,
Büchner, and Haeckel, and in the still dominant naturalistic
tendency and mood which acquired new form
and deep-rooted individuality through Darwinism,&mdash;in
all these we find naturalism, not indeed originating
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
as something new, but simply blossoming afresh with
increased strength. The antiquity of Naturalism is no
reproach, and no reason for regarding it as a matter long
since settled; it rather indicates that Naturalism is not a
chance phenomenon, but an inevitable growth. The favourite
method of treating it as though it were the outcome
of modern scepticism, malice, or obduracy, is just as
absurd as if the <q>naturalists</q> were to treat the convictions
of their opponents as the result of incredible narrow-mindedness,
priestly deception, senility, or calcification
of the brain-cells. And as naturalism is of ancient
origin so also do its different historical phases and forms
resemble each other in their methods, aims, and arguments,
as well as in the moods, sympathies, and antipathies
which accompany them. Even in its most
highly developed form we can see that it did not spring
originally from a completed and unified principle, but
was primarily criticism of and opposition to other views.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>What is Distinctive in the Naturalistic Outlook.</head>

<p>
At first tentative, but becoming ever more distinctly
conscious of its real motive, Naturalism has always
arisen in opposition to what we may call <q>supernatural</q>
propositions, whether these be the naïve
mythological explanations of world-phenomena found
in primitive religions, or the supernatural popular
metaphysics which usually accompanies the higher
forms. It is actuated at the same time by one of the
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
most admirable impulses in human nature,&mdash;the impulse
to explain and understand,&mdash;and to explain, if possible,
through simple, familiar, and ordinary causes. The
sane human understanding sees all about it the domain
of everyday and familiar phenomena. It is quite at
home in this domain; everything seems to it well-known,
clear, transparent, and easily understood; it
finds in it intelligible causes and certain laws which
govern phenomena, as well as a constant association of
cause and effect. Here everything can be individually
controlled and examined, and everything <q>happens
naturally.</q> Things govern themselves. Nothing unexpected,
nothing that has not its obvious causes,
nothing mysterious or miraculous happens here. Sharply
contrasted with this stands the region of the apparently
inexplicable, the supernatural, with all its influences
and operations, and results. To the religious interpretation
in its naïve, pious, or superstitious forms
of expression, this region of the supernatural seems to
encroach broadly and deeply on the domain of the
everyday world. But with the awakening of criticism
and reflection, and the deepening of investigation into
things, it retreats farther and farther, it surrenders piece
after piece to the other realm of thought, and this
arises doubt and suspicion. With these there soon
awakens a profound conviction that a similar mode of
causal connection binds all things together, a glimmering
of the uniformity and necessity embracing, comprehending,
and ultimately explaining all things. And these
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
presentiments, in themselves at first quite childishly and
almost mythologically conceived, may still be, even
when they first arise, and while they are still only
vaguely formulated, anticipations of later more definite
scientific conceptions. Such a beginning of naturalistic
consciousness may remain quite naïve and go no farther
than a silent but persistent protest. It makes free use
of such familiar expressions as <q>everything comes about
of itself</q>; <q>everything happens by natural means</q>;
<q>it is all <q>nature</q> or <q>evolution.</q></q> But from the
primitive naturalistic outlook there may arise reconstructions
of nature and cosmic speculations on a large
scale, expanding into naturalistic systems of the most
manifold kinds, beginning with those of the Ionic
philosophers and coming down to those of the most
recent times. Their watchwords remain the same,
though in an altered dialect: <q>nature and natural
phenomena,</q> the denial of <q>dualism,</q> the upholding of
the one principle <q>monism,</q> the all-sufficiency of nature,
and the absence of any intervening influences from
without or beyond nature. Rapidly and of necessity
this last item becomes transformed into a <q>denial of
teleology</q>: nature knows neither will nor purpose, it
has only to do with conditions and results. With these
it deals and through them it works. Even in the most
elementary naturalistic idea, that <q>everything happens
of itself,</q> there lurks that aversion to purpose which
characterises all naturalistic systems.
</p>

<p>
A naturalism which has arisen and grown in this
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
manner has in itself nothing to do with concrete and exact
knowledge of nature. It may comprise a large number
of ideas which are sharply opposed to <q>science,</q> and
which may be in themselves mythological, or poetical,
or even mystical. For what <q>nature</q> itself really is
fundamentally, how it moves, unfolds, or impels, how
things actually happen <q>naturally,</q> this naturalism has
never attempted to think out. Indeed, naturalism of
this type, though it opposes <q>dualism,</q> does not by any
means usually intend to set itself against religion. On
the contrary, in its later developments, it may take it up
into itself in the form of an apotheosis and a worship of
nature. Almost invariably naturalism which begins
thus develops, not into atheism, but into pantheism.
It is true that all is nature and happens naturally. But
nature itself, as Thales said, is <q>full of gods,</q> instinct
with divine life. It is the all-living which, unwearied
and inexhaustible, brings forth form after form and
pours out its fulness. It is Giordano Bruno's <q>Cause,
Principle, and Unity,</q> in endless beauty and overpowering
magnificence, and it is Goethe's <q>Great
Goddess,</q> herself the object of the utmost admiration,
reverence, and devotion. This mood may readily pass
over into a kind of worship of God and belief in
Him, <q>God</q> being regarded as the soul and mind, the
<q>Logos</q> of Heraclitus and the Stoics, the inner
meaning and reason of this all-living nature. And
thus naturalism in its last stages may sometimes be
quite devout, and may assure us that it is compelled
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
to deny only the transcendental and not the immanent
God, the Divine being enthroned above the
world, but not the living God dwelling within it.
And ever anew Goethe's verse is quoted:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What God would <emph>outwardly</emph> alone control,</l>
<l>And on His finger whirl the mighty Whole?</l>
<l>He loves the <emph>inner</emph> world to move, to view</l>
<l>Nature in Him, Himself in nature too,</l>
<l>So that what in Him works, and is, and lives,</l>
<l>The measure of His strength, His spirit gives.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The True Naturalism.</head>

<p>
But naturalism becomes fundamentally different when
it ceases to remain at the level of naïve or fancifully
conceived ideas of <q>nature</q> and <q>natural occurrences,</q>
when, instead of poetry or religious sentiments, it
incorporates something else, namely, exact natural
science and the idea of a mathematical-mechanical
calculability in the whole system of nature. <q>Nature</q>
and <q>happening naturally</q>, as used by the naïve
intelligence, are half animistic ideas and modes of
expression, which import into nature, or leave in it, life
and soul, impulse, and a kind of will. And that speculative
form of naturalism which tends to become
religious develops this fault to its utmost. But a
<q>nature</q> like this is not at all a possible subject for
natural science and exact methods, not a subject for
experiment, calculation, and fixed laws, for precise
interpretation, or for interpretation on simple rational
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
principles. Instead of the naïve, poetical, and half
mystical conceptions of nature we must have a really
scientific one, so that, so to speak, the supernatural may
be eliminated from nature, and the apparently irrational
rationalised; that is, so that all its phenomena may be
traced back to simple, unequivocal, and easily understood
processes, the actual why and how of all things
perceived, and thus, it may be, understood; so that, in
short, everything may be seen to come about <q>by
natural means.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is obviously one domain and order of processes
in nature which exactly fulfils those requirements, and
is really in the fullest sense <q>natural,</q> that is, quite
easily understood, quite rational, quite amenable to
computation and measurement, quite rigidly subordinate
to laws which can be formulated. These are the processes
of physics and chemistry, and in a still higher
degree those of movement in general, the processes of
mechanics in short. And to bring into this domain
and subordinate to its laws everything that occurs in
nature, all becoming, and passing away, and changing,
all development, growth, nutrition, reproduction, the
origin of the individual and of the species, of animals
and of man, of the living and the not living, even of
sensation and perception, impulse, desire and instinct,
will and thought&mdash;this alone would really be to show
that things <q>happen naturally,</q> that is, to explain
everything in terms of natural causes. And the conviction
that this can be done is the only true naturalism.
</p>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
Naturalism of this type is fundamentally different in
mood and character from the naïve and poetic form,
and is, indeed, in sharp contrast to it. It is working
against the very motives which are most vital to the
latter&mdash;namely, reverence for and deification of nature.
Where the two types of naturalism really understand
themselves nothing but sharp antagonism can exist
between them. Those on the one side must condemn
this unfeeling and irreverent, cold and mathematical
dissection and analysis of the <q>Great Goddess</q> as a
sacrilege and outrage. And those on the other side
must utterly reject as romantic the view which is
summed up in the confession: <q>Ist nicht Kern der
Natur Menschen im Herzen?</q> [Is not the secret of
nature in the human heart?]
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Goethe's Attitude to Naturalism.</head>

<p>
The most instructive example we can take is Goethe:
his veneration for nature on the one hand, and on the
other his pronounced opposition to the naturalism both
of the materialists and of the mathematicians. Modern
naturalists are fond of seeking repose and mental
refreshment in Goethe's conception of the world, under
the impression that it fits in best and most closely with
their own views. That they do this says much for
their mood and taste, but not quite so much for their
powers of discrimination or for their consistency. It
is even more thoughtless than when the empiricists
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
and sensationalists acclaim as their hero, Spinoza,
the strict, pure rationalist, the despiser of empiricism
and of knowledge acquired through the senses. For to
Goethe nature is far from being a piece of mechanism
which can be calculated on and summed up in mathematical
formulæ, an everlasting <q>perpetuum mobile,</q> a
magnificent all-powerful machine. In fact, all this and
especially the word <q>machine</q> expresses exactly what
Goethe's conception was most directly opposed to.
To him nature is truly the <q>Goddess,</q> the great Diana
of the Ephesians, the everlasting Beauty, the artist of
genius, ceaselessly inventing and creating, in floods of
Life, in Action's storm&mdash;an infinite ocean, a restless
weaving, a glowing Life. Embracing within herself
the highest and the humblest, she is in all things,
throughout all change and transformation, the same,
shadowing forth the most perfect in the simplest, and
in the highest only unfolding what she had already
shown in the lowliest. Therefore Goethe hated all
divisions and rubrics, all the contrasts and boundaries
which learned analysis attempts to introduce into
nature. Passionately he seized on Herder's idea of
evolution, and it was towards establishing it that all
his endeavours, botanical, zoological, morphological and
osteological, were directed. He discovered in the
human skull the premaxillary bone which occurs in the
upper jaw of all mammals, and this <q>keystone to man</q>
gave him, as he himself said, <q>such joy that all his
bowels moved.</q> He interpreted the skull as developed
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
from three modified vertebræ. He sketched a hypothesis
of the primitive plant, and the theory that all the organs
of the plant are modifications and developments of the
leaf. He was a friend of Etienne Geoffroy St. Hilaire,
who defended <q>l'unité de composition organique</q> in the
forms of nature, and evolution by gradual stages, and
he was the vehement opponent of Cuvier, who attempted
to pick the world to pieces according to strictly defined
architectural plans and rigid classes. And what the
inner impulse to all this was he has summed up in the
motto to his <q>Morphology</q> from the verse in Job:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not;</l>
<l>He is transformed, but I perceive him not.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
He further declares it in the introductory verse to his
Osteology:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Joyfully some years ago,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Zealously my spirit sought</l>
<l>To explore it all, and know</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How all nature lived and wrought:</l>
<l>And 'tis ever One in all,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Though in many ways made known;</l>
<l>Small in great, and great in small,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each in manner of its own.</l>
<l>Ever shifting, yet fast holding;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Near and far, and far and near;</l>
<l>So, with moulding and remoulding,&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To my wonder I am here.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In all this there is absolutely nothing of the characteristic
mood and spirit of <q>exact</q> naturalism, with its
mechanical and mathematical categories. It matters
little that Goethe, when he thought of evolution, never
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
had present to his mind the idea of Descent which is
characteristic of <q>Darwinism,</q> but rather development
in the lofty sense in which it is worked out in the
nature-philosophy of Schelling and of Hegel. The chief
point is, that to him nature was the all-living and ever-living,
whose creating and governing cannot be reduced
to prosaic numbers or mathematical formulæ, but are
to be apprehended as a whole by the perceptions of
genius rather than worked out by calculation or in
detail. Any other way of regarding nature Goethe
early and decisively rejected. And he has embodied
his strong protest against it in his <q>Dichtung und
Wahrheit</q>:
</p>

<p>
<q>How hollow and empty it seemed to us in this
melancholy, atheistical twilight.... Matter, we learnt,
has moved from all eternity, and by means of this
movement to right and left and in all directions, it has
been able, unaided, to call forth all the infinite phenomena
of existence.</q>
</p>

<p>
The book&mdash;the <q>Système de la Nature</q>&mdash;<q>seemed to
us so grey, so Cimmerian, so deathlike that it was with
difficulty we could endure its presence.</q>
</p>

<p>
And in a work with remarkable title and contents,
<q>Die Farbenlehre,</q> Goethe has summed up his antagonism
to the <q>Mathematicians,</q> and to their chief,
Newton, the discoverer and founder of the new mathematical-mechanical
view of nature. Yet the mode of
looking at things which is here combated with so much
labour, wit, and, in part, injustice, is precisely that of
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
those who, to this day, swear by the name of Goethe
with so much enthusiasm and so little intelligence
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The two Kinds of Naturalism.</head>

<p>
But let us return to the two kinds of naturalism we
have already described. Much as they differ from one
another in reality, they are very readily confused and
mixed up with one another. And the chief peculiarity
of what masquerades as naturalism among our educated
or half-educated classes to-day lies in the fact that it
is a mingling of the two kinds. Unwittingly, people
combine the moods of the one with the reasons and
methods of the other; and having done so they appear
to themselves particularly consistent and harmonious
in their thought, and are happy that they have been
able thus to satisfy at once the needs of the intellect
and those of the heart.
</p>

<p>
On the one hand they stretch the mathematical-mechanical
view as far as possible from below upwards,
and even attempt to explain the activities of life and
consciousness as the results of complex reflex mechanisms.
And on the other hand they bring down will soul and
instincts into the lowest stages of existence, and become
quite animistic. They wish to be nothing if not
<q>exact,</q> and yet they reckon Goethe and Bruno
among the greatest apostles of their faith, and set
their verses and sayings as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credo</foreign> and motto
over their own opinions. In this way there arises a <q>world
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
conception</q> so indiarubber-like and Protean that it is
as difficult as it is unsatisfactory to attempt to come
to an understanding with it. If we attempt to get
hold of it by the fringe of poetry and idealism it has
assumed, it promptly retires into its <q>exact</q> half.
And if we try to limit ourselves to this, in order to find
a basis for discussion, it spreads out before us all the
splendours of a great nature pantheism, including even
the ideas of the good, the true, and the beautiful. One
thing only it neglects, and that is, to show where its
two very different halves meet, and what inner bond
unites them. Thus if we are to discuss it at all, we
must first of all pick out and arrange all the foreign
and mutually contradictory constituents it has incorporated,
then deal with Pantheism and Animism, and
with the problem of the possibility of <q>the true, the
good, the beautiful</q> on the naturalistic-empiric basis,
and finally there would remain a readily-grasped residue
of naturalism of the second form, to come to some understanding
with which is both necessary and instructive.
</p>

<p>
In the following pages we shall confine ourselves
entirely to this type, and we shall not laboriously
disentangle it from the bewildering medley of ideas
foreign to it, or attempt to make it consistent; we
shall neglect these, and have regard solely to its clear
fundamental principles and aims. Thus regarded, its
horizons are perfectly well-defined. It is startling in
its absolute poverty of ideal content, warmth, and
charm, but impressive and grand in the perseverance
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
and tenacity with which it adheres to one main point
of view throughout. In reality, it is aggressive to
nothing, but cold and indifferent to everything, and
for this very reason is more dangerous than all the
excited protests and verdicts of the enthusiastic type of
naturalism, which it is impossible to attack, because of
its lack of definite principles, and which, in the pathetic
stress it lays on worshipping nature, lives only by
what it has previously borrowed from the religious
conceptions of the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Aim and Method of Naturalism.</head>

<p>
The aim and method of the strict type of naturalism
may be easily defined. In its details it will become more
distinct as we proceed with our analysis. Taking it as a
whole, we may say that it is an endeavour on a large scale
after consistent simplification and gradual reduction
to lower and lower terms. Since it aims at explaining
and understanding everything according to the axiom
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principia non temere
esse multiplicanda</foreign> [principles are
not to be heedlessly multiplied], explaining, that is,
with the fewest, simplest, and most obvious principles
possible, it is incumbent upon it to attempt to refer
all phenomena to a single, uniform mode of occurrence,
which admits of nothing outside of or beyond
itself, and which regulates itself according to its own
system of fundamentally similar causal sequences. It is
further incumbent upon it to trace back this universal
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
mode of occurrence to the simplest and clearest form
possible, and its uniformities to the fewest and most
intelligible laws, that is, ultimately, to laws which can
be determined by calculation and summed up in formulæ.
This tracing back is equivalent to an elimination of all
incommensurable causes, of all <q>final causes,</q> that is,
of ultimate causes and <q>purposes</q> which, in an unaccountable
manner, work into the network of proximate
causes and control them, and by thus interrupting
their connectedness, make it difficult to come to a clear
understanding of the <q>Why?</q> of things. And this
elimination is again a <q>reduction to simpler terms,</q>
for it replaces the <q>teleological</q> consideration of
purposes, by a purely scientific consideration of causes,
which inquires only into the actual conditions antecedent
to certain sequences.
</p>

<p>
But Being and Becoming include two great realms:
that of <q>Nature</q> and that of <q>Mind,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> consciousness
and the processes of consciousness. And two apparently
fundamentally different branches of knowledge relate to
these: the natural sciences, and the mental sciences.
If a unified and <q>natural</q> explanation is really possible,
the beginning and end of all this <q>reducing to
simpler terms</q> must be to bridge over the gulf between
these; but this, in the sense of naturalism, necessarily
means that the mental sciences must in some way be
reduced to terms of natural science, and that the
phenomena, processes, sequences, and laws of consciousness
must likewise be made <q>commensurable</q> with and
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
be linked on to the apparently simpler and clearer knowledge
of <q>Nature,</q> and, if possible, be subordinated to
its phenomena and laws, if not indeed derived from
them. As it is impossible to regard consciousness
itself as corporeal, or as a process of movement,
naturalism must at least attempt to show that the
phenomena of consciousness are attendant and consequent
on corporeal phenomena, and that, though they
themselves never become corporeal, they are strictly
regulated by the laws of the corporeal and physical, and
can be calculated upon and studied in the same way.
</p>

<p>
But even the domain of the natural itself, as we know
it, is by no means simple and capable of a unified
interpretation. Nature, especially in the realm of
organic life, the animal and plant world, appears to be
filled with marvels of purposefulness, with riddles of
development and differentiation, in short with all the
mysteries of life. Here most of all it is necessary to
<q>reduce</q> the <q>teleological view</q> to terms of the
purely causal, and to prove that all the results, even
the evolution of the forms of life, up to their highest
expressions and in the minutest details of their marvellous
adaptations, came <q>of themselves,</q> that is to say,
are quite intelligible as the results of clearly traceable
causes. It is necessary to reduce the physiological and
developmental, and all the other processes of life, to terms
of physical and chemical processes, and thus to reduce
the living to the not living, and to derive the organic
from the forces and substances of inanimate nature.
</p>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<p>
The process of reduction does not stop even here.
For physical and chemical processes are only really
understood when they can be resolved into the simplest
processes of movement in general, when all
qualitative changes can be traced hack to purely quantitative
phenomena, when, finally, in the mechanics of
the great masses, as well as of the infinitely small
atoms, everything becomes capable of expression in
mathematical terms.
</p>

<p>
But naturalism of this kind is by no means pure
natural science; it consciously and deliberately oversteps
in speculation the bounds of what is strictly
scientific. In this respect it bears some resemblance to
the nature-philosophy associated with what we called
the first type of naturalism. But its very poverty
enables it to have a strictly defined programme. It
knows exactly what it wants, and thus it is possible to
argue with it. The religious conception of the world
must come to an understanding with it, for it is quite
obvious that the more indifferent this naturalism is to
everything outside of itself, and the less aggressive it
pretends to be, the more does the picture of the world
which it attempts to draw exert a cramping influence
on religion. Where the two come into contact we shall
endeavour to make clear in the following pages.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Fundamental Principles.</head>

<p>
The fundamental convictions of naturalism, its general
tendencies, and the points of view which determine its
outlook, are primarily related to that order of facts
which forms the subject of the natural sciences, to
<q>Nature.</q> It is only secondarily that it attempts to
penetrate with the methods of the natural sciences
into the region of the conscious, of the mind, into the
domain that underlies the mental sciences, including
history and the æsthetic, political, and religious sciences,
and to show that, in this region as in the other, natural
law and the same principles of interpretation obtain,
that here, too, the <q>materialistic conception of history
holds true, and that there is no autonomy of mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
The interests of religion here go hand in hand with
those of the mental sciences, in so far as these claim to be
distinct and independent. For the question is altogether
one of the reality, pre-eminence, and independence of
the spiritual as opposed to the <q>natural.</q> Occasionally
it has been thought that the whole problem of
the relations between religion and naturalism was concentrated
on this point, and the study of nature has
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
been left to naturalism as if it were indifferent or even
hopeless, thus leaving a free field for theories of all
kinds, the materialistic included. It is only in regard
to the Darwinian theory of evolution and the mechanical
theory of the origin and nature of life, and particularly
in regard to the relatively unimportant question
of <q>spontaneous generation</q> that a livelier interest
is usually awakened. But these isolated theories are
only a part of the <q>reduction,</q> which is characteristic
of naturalism, and they can only be rightly estimated
and understood in connection with it. We shall turn
our attention to them only after we have carefully considered
what is fundamental and essential. But the
idea that religion may calmly neglect the study of
nature as long as naturalism leaves breathing-room for
the freedom and independence of mind is quite erroneous.
If religion is true, nature must be of God, and
it must bear tokens which allow us to interpret it as of
God. And such signs are to be found. What we shall
have to say in regard to them may be summed up in the
following propositions:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. Even the world, which has been brought under
the reign of scientific laws, is a mystery; it has been
<emph>formulated</emph>, but not <emph>explained</emph>.
</p>

<p>
2. The world governed by law is still dependent, conditioned,
and <q>contingent.</q>
</p>

<p>
3. The conception of Nature as obedient to law is
not excluded but rather demanded by belief in God.
</p>

<p>
4, 5. We cannot comprehend the true nature and
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
depth of things, and the world which we do comprehend
is not the true Reality of things; it is only its
appearance. In feeling and intuition this appearance
points beyond itself to the true nature of things.
</p>

<p>
6. Ideas and purposes, and with them Providence
and the control of things, can neither be established by
the natural sciences nor disputed by them.
</p>

<p>
7. The causal interpretation demanded by natural
science fits in with an explanation according to purpose,
and the latter presupposes the former.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>How the Religious and the Naturalistic
Outlooks Conflict.</head>

<p>
Religion comes into contact with naturalism and demands
to be reconciled with it, not merely at its periphery,
but at its very core, namely, with its characteristic
ideal of a mathematical-mechanical interpretation of the
whole world. This ideal seems to be most nearly, if not
indeed completely, attained in reference to the inter-relations
of the great masses, in the realm of astronomy,
with the calculable, inviolable, and entirely comprehensible
conditions which govern the purely mechanical
correlations of the heavenly bodies. To bring the
same clearness and intelligibility, the same inevitableness
and calculability into the world in general, and
into the whole realm of nature down to the mysterious
law determining the development of the daintiest insect's
wing, and the stirrings of the grey matter in the
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
cortex of the brain which reveal themselves to us as
sensation, desire, and thought, this has always been the
aim and secret faith of the naturalistic mode of thought.
It is thus aiming at a Cosmos of all Being and Becoming,
which can be explained from itself, and comprehended
in itself alone, supported by its own complete
and all-sufficing causality and uniformity, resting in
itself, shut up within itself, complete in itself&mdash;a God
sufficient unto himself and resting in himself.
</p>

<p>
We do not need to probe very deeply to find out
how strongly religion resists this attempt, and we easily
discover what is the disturbing element which awakens
hostile feeling. It is of three kinds, and depends on
three characteristic aims and requirements of religion,
which are closely associated with one another, yet distinct
from one another, though it is not always easy to
represent them in their true proportions and relative
values. The first of these interests seems to be
<q>teleology,</q> the search after guiding ideas and purposes,
after plan and directive control in the whole machinery,
that sets itself in sharp opposition to a mere inquiry
into proximate causes. Little or nothing is gained by
knowing how everything came about or must have
come about; all interest lies in the fact that everything
has come about in such a way that it reveals intention,
wisdom, providence, and eternal meaning, realising
itself in details and in the whole. This has always
been rightly regarded as the true concern and interest
of every religious conception of the world. But it has
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
been sometimes forgotten that this is by no means the
only, or even the primary interest that religion has in
world-lore. We call it its highest and ultimate interest,
but we find, on careful study, that two others are associated
with and precede it.
</p>

<p>
For before all belief in Providence and in the divine
meaning of the world, indeed before faith at all,
religion is primarily feeling&mdash;a deep, humble consciousness
of the entire dependence and conditionality of
our existence, and of all things. The belief we have
spoken of is, in relation to this feeling, merely a
form&mdash;as yet not in itself religious. It is not only the
question <q>Have the world and existence a meaning, and
are phenomena governed by ideas and purposes?</q> that
brings religion and its antagonists into contact; there is
a prior and deeper question. Is there scope for this
true inwardness of all religion, the power to comprehend
itself and all the world in humility in the light of that
which is not of the world, but is above world and
existence? But this is seriously affected by that
doctrine which attempts to regard the Cosmos as self-governing
and self-sufficing, needing nothing, and failing
in nothing. It is this and not Darwinism or the
descent from a Simian stock that primarily troubles the
religious spirit. It is more specially sensitive to the
strange and antagonistic tendency of naturalism shown
even in that marvellous and terrifying mathematical-mechanical
system of the great heavenly bodies, in this
clock of the universe which, in obedience to clear and
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
inviolable laws, carries on its soundless play from everlasting
to everlasting, needing no pendulum and no
pedestal, without any stoppage and without room for
dependence on anything outside of itself, apparently
entirely godless, but absolutely reason and God enough
for itself. It shrinks in terror from the thought that
the same autonomy and self-regulation may be brought
down from the stage of immensity into the play of
everyday life and events.
</p>

<p>
But we must penetrate still deeper. Schleiermacher
has directed our attention anew to the fact
that the most profound element in religion is that deep-lying
consciousness of all creatures, <q>I that am dust and
ashes,</q> that humble feeling of the absolute dependence
of every being in the world on One that is above all the
world. But religion does not fully express itself even
in this; there is yet another note that sounds still
deeper and is the keynote of the triad. <q>Let a man
examine himself.</q> Is it not the case that we ourselves,
in as far as the delight in knowledge and the enthusiasm
for solving riddles have taken hold of us, rejoice in every
new piece of elucidation and interpretation that science
succeeds in making, that we are in the fullest sympathy
with the impulse to understand everything and bring
reason and clearness into it, and that we give hearty
adherence to the leading ideas which guide the investigations
of natural science? Yet on the other hand, in
as far as we are religious, do we not sometimes feel a
sudden inward recoil from this almost profane eagerness
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
to penetrate into the mystery of things, this desire to
have everything intelligible, clear, rational and transparent?
This feeling which stirs in us has always
existed in all religious minds and will only die with
them. And we need not hesitate to say so plainly.
For this is the most real characteristic of religion; it
seeks depth in things, reaches out towards what is concealed,
uncomprehended, and mysterious. It is more
than humility; it is piety. And piety is experience
of mystery.
</p>

<p>
It is at this point that religion comes most violently
into antagonism with the meaning and mood of
naturalism. Here they first conflict in earnest. And
it is here above all that scientific investigation and its
materialistic complement seem to take away freedom
and truth, air and light from religion. For science is
seeking especially this: Deeper penetration into and
illumination of the world. It presses with macroscope
and microscope into its most outlying regions and
most hidden corners, into its abysses and fastnesses. It
explains away the old idea of two worlds, one on this
side and one on that, and rejects heavenly things with
the notice <q>No Room</q> of which D. Fr. Strauss speaks.
It aims at discovering the mathematical world-formulæ,
if not indeed one great general formula which embraces,
defines unequivocally, and rationalises all the processes
of and in infinity, from the movements of Sirius to
those of the cilia of the infusorian in the drop of water,
and which not only crowds <q>heaven</q> out of the world,
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
but strips away from things the fringe of the mysterious
and incommensurable which seemed to surround them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Mystery : Dependence : Purpose.</head>

<p>
There is then a threefold religious interest, and there
are three corresponding points of contact between the
religious and the naturalistic interpretations of the world,
where, as it appears, they are necessarily antagonistic
to one another. Arranging them in their proper order
we find, first, the interest, never to be relinquished, of
experiencing and acknowledging the world and existence
to be a mystery, and regarding all that is known and
manifested in things merely as the thin crust which
separates us from the uncomprehended and inexpressible.
Secondly, there is the desire on the part of religion to
bring ourselves and all creatures into the <q>feeling of
absolute dependence,</q> and, as the belief in creation
does, to subordinate ourselves and them to the Eternal
Power that is not of the world, but is above the world.
Finally, there is the interest in a teleological interpretation
of the world as opposed to the purely causal
interpretation of natural science; that is to say, an
interpretation of the world according to eternal God-willed
purposes, governing ideas, a plan and aim. In
all three respects, it is important to religion that it
should be able to maintain its validity and freedom as
contrasted with naturalism.
</p>

<p>
But while religion must inquire of itself into the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
reality of things, with special regard to its own needs,
there are two possibilities which may serve to make
peace between it and natural science. It may, for
instance, be possible that the mathematical-mechanical
interpretation of things, even if it be sufficient within
its own domain, does not take away from nature the
characters which religion seeks and requires in it,
namely, purpose, dependence and mystery. Or it may
be that nature itself does not correspond at all to this
ideal of mathematical explicability, that this ideal may
be well enough as a guide for investigation, but that it
is not a fundamental clue really applying to nature as
a whole and in its essence. It may be that nature
as a whole cannot be scientifically summed up without
straining the mechanical categories. And this suggests
another possibility, namely, that the naturalistic method
of interpretation cannot be applied throughout the
whole territory of nature, that it embraces certain
aspects but not others, and, finally, that it is distinctly
interrupted and held in abeyance at particular points by
the incommensurable which breaks forth spontaneously
out of the depths of phenomena, revealing a depth
which is not to be explained away.
</p>

<p>
All these possibilities occur. And though they need
not necessarily be regarded as the key to our order of
discussion, in what follows we shall often meet them
singly or together.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Mystery of Existence Remains
Unexplained.</head>

<p>
1. Let us begin with the problem of the mystery of
all existence, and see whether it remains unaffected, or
whether it disappears in face of naturalistic interpretation,
with its discovery and formulation of law and
order, with its methods of measuring and computing.
More primary even than faith and heartfelt trust in everlasting
wisdom and purposeful Providence there is piety;
there is devout sense of awe before the marvellous and
mysterious, before the depth and the hidden nature of all
things and all being, before unspeakable mysteries over
which we hover, and abysmal depths over which we are
borne. In a world which had not these, and could not be
first felt in this way, religion could not live at all. It
could not sail on its too shallow waters, or breathe its
too thin air. It is indeed a fact that what alone we can
fitly speak of and love as religion&mdash;the sense of mystery
and the gentle shuddering of piety before the depth of
phenomena and their everlasting divine abysses,&mdash;has
its true place and kingdom in the world of mind and
history, with its experiences, riddles, and depths. But
mystery is to be found in the world of nature as well.
It is only to a very superficial study that it could
appear as though nature were, or ever could become,
plain and obvious, as if the veil of Isis which shrouds
its depths from all investigation could ever be torn
away. From this point of view it would make no
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
difference even though the attempt to range the whole
realm of nature under the sway of inviolable laws were
to be immediately successful. This is expressed in the
first of our main propositions (p. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>).
</p>

<p>
In order to realise this it is necessary to reflect for a
little on the relation of <q>explanation</q> and <q>description</q>
to one another, and on what is meant by <q>establishing
laws</q> and <q>understanding</q> in general. The
aim of all investigation is to understand the world. To
understand it obviously means something more than
merely to know it. It is not enough for us to know
things, that is, to know what, how many, and what
different kinds of things there are. On the contrary,
we want to understand them, to know how they came
to be as they are, and why they are precisely as they
are. The first step towards this understanding is merely
to know, that is, we must rightly apprehend and disentangle
the things and processes of the world, grouping
them, and describing them adequately and exhaustively.
</p>

<p>
But what I have merely described I have not yet
understood; I am only preparing to try to understand
it. It stands before me enveloped in all its mystery,
and I must now begin to attempt to solve it, for describing
is not explaining; it is only challenging explanation.
The next step is to discover and formulate
the laws. For when man sifts out things and processes
and follows them out into their changes and stages he
discovers the iron regularity of sequences, the strictly
defined lines and paths, the inviolable order and connection
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
in things and occurrences, and he formulates
these into laws, ascribing to them the idea of necessity
which he finds in himself. In so doing he makes
distinct progress, for he can now go beyond what is
actually seen, he can draw inferences with certainty as
to effects and work back to causes. And thus order,
breadth of view, and uniformity are brought into his
acquaintance with facts, and his science begins. For
science does not merely mean acquaintance with phenomena
in their contingent or isolated occurrence,
manifold and varied as that may be; it is the discovery
and establishment of the laws and general modes of
occurrence. Without this we might collect curiosities,
but we should not have science. And to discover this
network of uniformities throughout all phenomena, in
the movements of the heavenly bodies and in the living
substance of the cell alike, is the primary aim of all
investigation. We are still far away from this goal,
and it is more than questionable whether we shall ever
reach it.
</p>

<p>
But if the goal should ever be reached, if, in other
words, we should ever be able to say with certainty what
must result if occurrences <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> are
given, or what <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> must
have been when <hi rend='italic'>c</hi> occurs, would
explanation then have taken the place of description?
Or would understanding have replaced mystery?
Obviously not at all. It has indeed often been supposed
that this would be the case. People have imagined
they have understood, when they have seen that
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
<q>that is always so, and that it always happens in this
particular way.</q> But this is a naïve idea. The region
of the described has merely become larger, and the
riddle has become more complex. For now we have
before us not only the things themselves, but the more
marvellous laws which <q>govern</q> them. But laws are not
forces or impelling causes. They do not cause anything
to happen, and they do not explain anything. And as
in the case of things so in that of laws, we want to
know how they are, whence they come, and why they
are as they are and not quite different. The fact
that we have described them simply excites still more
strongly the desire to explain them. To explain is to
be able to answer the question <q>Why?</q>
</p>

<p>
Natural science is very well aware of this. It calls
its previous descriptions <q>merely historical,</q> and it
desires to supplement these with ætiology, causal explanation,
a deeper interpretation, that in its turn will
make laws superfluous, because it will penetrate so
deeply into the nature of things that it will see precisely
why these, and not other laws of variation, of
development, of becoming, hold sway. This is just
the meaning of the <q>reductions</q> of which we have
already spoken. For instance, in regard to crystal
formation, <q>explanation</q> will have replaced description
only when, instead of demonstrating the forms and
laws according to which a particular crystal always and
necessarily arises out of a particular solution, we are
able to show why, from a particular mixture and because
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
of certain co-operating molecular forces, and of other
more primary, more remote, but also intelligible conditions,
these forms and processes of crystallisation should
always and of necessity occur. If this explanation were
possible, the <q>law</q> would also be explained, and would
therefore become superfluous. From this and similar
examples we can learn at what point <q>explanation</q>
begins to replace description, namely, when processes
resolve themselves into simpler processes from the concurrence
of which they arise. This is exactly what
natural science desires to bring about, and what
naturalism hopes ultimately to succeed in, thereby
solving the riddle of existence.
</p>

<p>
But this kind of reduction to simpler terms only
becomes <q>explanation</q> when these simpler terms are
themselves clear and intelligible and not merely simple;
that is to say, when we can immediately see why the
simpler process occurs, and by what means it is brought
about, when the question as to the <q>why</q> is no
longer necessary, because, on becoming aware of the
process, we immediately and directly perceive that it is
a matter of course, indisputable, and requiring no
proof. If this is not the case, the reduction to simpler
terms has been misleading. We have only replaced one
unintelligibility by another, one description by another,
and so simply pushed back the whole problem. Naturalism
supposes that by this gradual pushing back the
task will at least become more and more simple, until
at last a point is reached where the riddle will solve
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
itself, because description becomes equivalent to explanation.
This final stage is supposed to be found in
the forces of attraction and repulsion, with which the
smallest similar particles of matter are equipped. Out
of the endlessly varied correlations of these there arise
all higher forms of energy and all the combinations
which make up more complex phenomena.
</p>

<p>
But in reality this does not help us at all. For now
we are definitely brought face to face with the quite
unanswerable question, How, from all this homogeneity
and unity of the ultimate particles and forces, can we
account for the beginnings of the diversity which is so
marked a characteristic of this world? Whence came
the causes of the syntheses to higher unities, the reasons
for the combination into higher resultants of energy?
</p>

<p>
But even apart from that, it is quite obvious that we
have not yet reached the ultimate point. For can
<q>attraction,</q> influence at a distance, <foreign rend='italic'>vis a fronte</foreign>,
be considered as a fact which is in itself clear? Is it not
rather the most puzzling fundamental riddle we can be
called upon to explain? Assuredly. And therefore
the attempt is made to penetrate still deeper to the
ultimate point, the last possible reduction to simpler
terms, by referring all actual <q>forces</q> and reducing
all movement, and therewith all <q>action,</q> to terms of
attraction and repulsion, which are free from anything
mysterious, whose mode of working can be unambiguously
and plainly set forth in the law of the parallelogram
of forces. Law? Set forth? Therefore still
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
only description? Certainly only description, not explanation
in the least. Even assuming that it is true,
instead of a mere Utopia, that all the secrets and riddles
of nature can be traced back to matter moved by attraction
and repulsion according to the simplest laws of these,
they would still only be summed up into a great general
riddle, which is only the more colossal because it is able
to embrace all others within itself. For attraction and
repulsion, the transference of motion, and the combination
of motion according to the law of the parallelogram
of forces&mdash;all this is merely description of processes whose
inner causes we do not understand, which appear simple,
and are so, but are nevertheless not self-evident or to
be taken as a matter of course; they are not in themselves
intelligible, but form an absolute <q>world-riddle.</q>
From the very root of things there gazes at us the
same Sphinx which we had apparently driven from the
foreground.
</p>

<p>
But furthermore, this reduction to simpler terms is
an impossible and never-ending task. There is fresh
confusion at every step. In reducing to simpler terms,
it is often forgotten that the principle of combination
is not inherent in the more simple, and cannot be
<q>reduced.</q> Or else there is an ignoring of the fact
that a transition has been made, not from resultants to
components, but to quite a different kind of phenomena.
Innumerable as are the possible reductions to simpler
terms, and mistaken as it would be to remain prematurely
at the level of description, it cannot be denied
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
that the fundamental facts of the world are pure facts
which must simply be accepted where they occur, indisputable,
inexplicable, impenetrable, the <q>whence</q> and
the <q>how</q> of their existence quite uncomprehended.
And this is especially true of every new and peculiar
expression of what we call energy and energies.
Gravitation cannot be reduced to terms of attraction
and repulsion, nor action at a distance to action at
close quarters; it might, indeed, be shown that repulsion
in its turn presupposes attraction before it can
become possible; the <q>energies</q> of ponderable matter
cannot be reduced to the <q>ether</q> and its processes
of motion, nor the complex play of the chemical
affinities to the attraction of masses in general or
to gravity. And thus the series ascends throughout
the spheres of nature up to the mysterious directive
energies in the crystal, and to the underivable
phenomena of movement in the living substance,
perhaps even to the functions of will-power. All
these can be discovered, but not really understood.
They can be described, but not explained. And we
are absolutely ignorant as to why they should have
emerged from the depth of nature, what that depth
really is, or what still remains hidden in her mysterious
lap. Neither what nature reveals to us nor what it
conceals from us is in any true sense <q>comprehended,</q>
and we flatter ourselves that we understand her secrets
when we have only become accustomed to them. If we
try to break the power of this accustomedness and to
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
consider the actual relations of things there dawns in
us a feeling already awakened by direct impressions
and experience; the feeling of the mysterious and enigmatical,
of the abyssmal depths beneath, and of what
lies far above our comprehension, alike in regard to
our own existence and every other. The world is at no
point self-explanatory, but at all points marvellous.
Its laws are only formulated riddles.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Evolution and New Beginnings.</head>

<p>
All this throws an important light upon two subjects
which are relevant in this connection, but which cannot
here be exhaustively dealt with,&mdash;evolution and new
beginnings. Let us consider, for instance, the marvellous
range and diversity of the characteristic
chemical properties and interrelations of substances.
Each one of them, contrasted with the preceding lower
forms and stages of <q>energy,</q> contrasted with mere
attraction, repulsion, gravitation, is something absolutely
new, a new interpolation (of course not in regard
to time but to grade), a phenomenon which cannot be
<q>explained</q> by what has gone before. It simply
occurs, and we find it in its own time and place. We
may call this new emergence <q>evolution,</q> and we may
use this term in connection with every new stage higher
than those preceding it. But it is not evolution in a
crude and quantitative sense, according to which the
<q>more highly evolved</q> is nothing more than an
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
addition and combination of what was already there;
it is evolution in the old sense of the word, according to
which the more developed is a higher analogue of the
less developed, but is in its own way as independent, as
much a new beginning as each of the antecedent stages,
and therefore in the strict sense neither derivable from
them nor reducible to them.
</p>

<p>
It must be noted that in this sense evolution and
new beginnings are already present at a very early stage
in nature and are part of its essence. We must bear
this in mind if we are rightly to understand the subtler
processes in nature which we find emerging at a higher
level. It is illusory to suppose that it is a <q>natural</q>
assumption to <q>derive</q> the living from lower processes
in nature. The non-living and the inorganic are also
underivable as to their individual stages, and the leap
from the inorganic to the organic is simply much
greater than that from attraction in general to chemical
affinity. As a matter of fact, the first occurrence&mdash;undoubtedly
controlled and conditioned by internal
necessity&mdash;of crystallisation, or of life, or of sensation
has just the same marvellousness as everything individual
and everything new in any ascending series in
nature. In short, every new beginning has the same
marvel.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps this consideration goes still deeper, throwing
light upon or suggesting the proper basis for a study
of the domain of mind and of history. It is immediately
obvious that there, at any rate, we enter into a
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
region of phenomena which cannot be derived from anything
antecedent, or reduced to anything lower. It must
be one of the chief tasks of naturalism to explain away
these facts, and to maintain the sway of <q>evolution,</q>
not in our sense but in its own, that is <q>to explain</q>
everything new and individual from that which precedes
it. But the assertion that this can be done is here
doubly false. For, in the first place, it cannot be
proved that methods of study which are relatively valid
for natural phenomena are applicable also to those of
the mind. And in the second place we must admit that
even in nature&mdash;apart from mind&mdash;we have to do with
new beginnings which are underivable from their antecedents.
</p>

<p>
All being is inscrutable mystery as a whole, and from
its very foundations upwards through each successively
higher stage of its evolution, in an increasing degree,
until it reaches a climax in the incomprehensibility of
individuality. It is a mystery that does not force itself
into nature as supernatural or miraculous, but is fundamentally
implicit in it, a mystery that in its unfolding
assuredly follows the strictest law, the most inviolable
rules, whether in the chemical affinities a higher grade
of energies reveals itself, or whether&mdash;unquestionably
also in obedience to everlasting law&mdash;the physical and
chemical conditions admit of the occurrence of life, or
whether in his own time and place a genius arises.<note place='foot'><p>This
has been urged often enough even by scientific investigators.
In such cases they have frequently been reproached for dragging
miracles into nature when they call a halt in face of the <q>underivable</q>
and the <q>mysterious.</q> This is a complete misunderstanding. With
miracles and with the supernatural in the historical sense of these
words, this mode of regarding nature has nothing whatever to do. It
would be much more reasonable to maintain the converse: that
there exists between supernatural ideas and the belief in the absolute
explicability and rationalisation of nature a peculiar mutual relation
and attraction. For, if we think out the relation clearly, we must
see that all real and consistent belief in miracles demands as its most
effective background the clearest possible explicability of nature. It
pictures to itself two natures, so to speak: nature and supernature,
and the latter of these interpolates itself into the former in the form
of sudden and occasional interruptions; that is to say, as miracles.
The purpose of miracles is to be recognised as such, as events absolutely
different from the ordinary course of happening. And they
are most likely thus to be recognised when nature itself is translucent
and mathematical. Thus we find that supernaturalism quite readily
accepts, and even insists upon a rationalistic explanation of nature.
But this is quite incorrect. Nature is not so thoroughly rationalised
and calculable as such a point of view would have us believe.
</p>
<p>
The really religious element in belief in miracles is that it, too, in
its own way, is seeking after mystery, dependence and providence.
It fails because it naïvely seeks for these in isolated and exceptional
acts, which have no analogy to other phenomena. It regards these
as arbitrary acts, and does so because it overlooks or underestimates
the fact that they have to be reckoned with throughout the whole of
nature.</p></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Dependence of the Order of Nature.</head>

<p>
(2 and 3). The <q>dependence</q> of all things is the second
requirement of religion, without which it is altogether
inconceivable. We avoid the words <q>creation</q> and
<q>being created,</q> because they involve anthropomorphic
and altogether insufficient modes of representation. But
throughout we have in mind, as suggested by Schleiermacher's
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
expression already quoted, what all religion
means when it declares nature and the world to be
<emph>creatures</emph>. The inalienable content of this idea is that
deep and assured feeling that our nature and all nature
does not rest in its own strength and self-sufficiency,
that there must be more secure reasons for nature which
are absolutely outside of it, and that it is dependent
upon, and conditioned through and through by something
above itself, independent, and unconditioned. <q>I
believe that God has created me together with all
creatures.</q> (Luther.)
</p>

<p>
This faith seemed easier in earlier times, when
men's eyes were not yet opened to see the deep-lying
connectedness of all phenomena, the inexorableness
of causal sequences, when it was believed that, in
the apparently numerous interruptions of the causal
sequences, the frailty and dependence of this world
and its need for heavenly aid could be directly observed,
when, therefore, it was not difficult to believe that the
world was <q>nothing</q> and perishable, that it had been
called forth out of nothing, and that in its transient
nature it carried for ever the traces of this origin.
But to-day it is not so easy to believe in this dependence,
for nature seems to show itself, in its inviolable
laws and unbroken sequences, as entirely sufficient unto
itself, so that for every phenomenon a sufficient cause
is to be found within nature, that is, in the sum of the
antecedent states and conditions which, according to
inevitable laws, must result in and produce what follows.
</p>

<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<p>
We have already noted that this is most obviously
discernible in the world of the great masses, the
heavenly bodies which pursue their courses from everlasting
to everlasting, mutually conditioning themselves
and betraying no need for or dependence upon
anything outside of themselves. Everything, even the
smallest movement, is here determined strictly by the
dependence of each upon all and of all upon each.
There is no variation, no change of position for which
an entirely satisfactory cause cannot be found in the
system as a whole, which works like an immense
machine. Nothing indicates dependence upon anything
external. And as it is to-day so it was yesterday,
and a million years ago, and innumerable millions of
years ago. It seems quite gratuitous to suppose that
something which does not occur to-day was necessary at
an earlier period, and that everything has not been
from all eternity just as it is now.
</p>

<p>
We saw that naturalism is attempting to extend this
character of independence and self-sufficiency from the
astronomical world to the world as a whole. Shall we
attempt, then, to oppose it in this ambition, but surrender
the realm of the heavenly bodies as already conquered?
By no means. For religion cannot exclude
the solar system from the dependence of all being upon
God. And this very example is the most conspicuous
one, the one in regard to which the whole problem can
be most definitely formulated.
</p>

<p>
Astronomy teaches us that all cosmic processes are
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
governed by a marvellous far-reaching uniformity of
law, which unites in strictest harmony the nearest
and the most remote. Has this fact any bearing upon
the problem of the dependence of the world? No.
It surely cannot be that a world without order could be
brought under the religious point of view more readily
than one governed by law! Let us suppose for a
moment that we had to do with a world without strict
nexus and definite order of sequence, without law and
without order, full of capricious phenomena, unregulated
associations, an inconstant play of causes. Such a world
would be to us unintelligible, strange, absurd. But
it would not necessarily be more <q>dependent,</q> more
<q>conditioned</q> than any other. Had I no other reasons
for looking beyond the world, and for regarding it as
dependent on something outside of itself, the absence of
law and order would assuredly furnish me with none.
For, assuming that it is possible at all to conceive of a
world and its contents as independent, and as containing
its own sufficient cause within itself, it would be quite
as easily thought of as a confused lawless play of
chances as a well-ordered Cosmos. Perhaps more
easily; for it goes without saying that such a conglomeration
of promiscuous chances could not possibly
be thought of as a world of God. Order and strict
obedience to law, far from being excluded, are required
by faith in God, are indeed a direct and inevitable preliminary
to thinking of the world as dependent upon
God. Thus we may state the paradox, that only a
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
Cosmos which, by its strict obedience to law, gives us the
impression of being sufficient unto itself, can be conceived
of as actually dependent upon God, as His
creation. If any man desires to stop short at the
consideration of the apparent self-sufficiency of the
Cosmos and its obedience to law, and refuses to recognise
any reasons outside of the world for this, we should
hardly be able, according to our own proposition, to
require him to go farther. For we maintained that
God could not be read out of nature, that the idea of
God could never have been gained in the first instance
from a study of nature and the world. The problem
always before us is rather, whether, having gained the
idea from other sources, we can include the world within
it. Our present question is whether the world, as it is,
and just because it is as it is, can be conceived of as
dependent upon God. And this question can only be
answered in the affirmative, and in the sense of Schiller's
oft-quoted lines:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>The great Creator</l>
<l>We see not&mdash;He conceals himself within</l>
<l>His own eternal laws. The sceptic sees</l>
<l>Their operation, but beholds not Him,</l>
<l><q>Wherefore a God!</q> he cries, <q rend='pre'>the world itself</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Suffices for itself!</q> and Christian prayer</l>
<l>Ne'er praised him more, than does this blasphemy.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
God's world could not possibly be a conglomeration
of chances; it must be orderly, and the fact that it is
so proves its dependence.
</p>

<p>
But while we thus hold fast to our canon, we shall
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
find that the assertion of the world's dependence receives
indirect corroboration even in regard to the astronomical
realm, from certain signs which it exhibits, from certain
suggestions which are implied in it. We must not
wholly overlook two facts which, to say the least, are
difficult to fit in with the idea of the independence and
self-sufficiency of the world; these are, on the one hand,
the difficulties involved in the idea of an eternal machine,
and on the other the difficult fact of <q>entropy.</q> We
have already compared the world to a mighty clock, or a
machine which, as a whole, represents what can never be
found in one of its parts, a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>perpetuum
mobile</foreign>. Let us however leave aside the idea of a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>perpetuum mobile</foreign>, and
dwell rather on the comparison with a machine. It
seems obvious that in order to be a machine there must
be a closed solidarity in the system. But how could a
machine have come into existence and become functional
if it is driven by wheels, which are driven by wheels,
which are again driven by wheels ... and so on unceasingly?
It would not be a machine. The idea falls
to pieces in our hands. Yet our world is supposed to
be just such an infinitely continuous <q>system.</q> How
does it begin to depend upon and be sufficient unto
itself? But further. It is a clock, we are told, which
ever winds itself up anew, which, without fatigue and in
ceaseless repetition, adjusts the universal cycles of becoming,
and disappearing, and becoming again. It
seems a corroboration of the old Heraclitian and Stoic
conception, that the eternal primitive fire brings forth
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
all things out of itself, and takes them back into itself
to bring them forth anew. Even to-day the conception
is probably general that, out of the original
states of the world-matter, circling fiery nebulæ form
themselves and throw off their rings, that the breaking
up of these rings gives rise to planets which circle in
solar systems for many æons through space, till, finally,
their energy lessened by friction with the ether, they
plunge into their suns again, that the increased heat
restores the original state and the whole play begins
anew.
</p>

<p>
All this was well enough in the days of naïvely
vitalistic ideas of the world as having a life and
soul. But not in these days of mechanics, the strict
calculation of the amount of energy used, and the
mechanical theory of heat. The world-clock cannot
wind itself up. It, too, owes its activity to the transformation
of potential energy into kinetic energy. And,
since movement and work take place within it, there is
in the clock as a whole just as in every one of its parts,
a mighty process of relaxation of an originally tense
spring, there is dissipation and transformation of the
stored potential energy into work and ultimately into
heat. And with every revolution of the earth and its
moon the world is moving slowly but inexorably towards
a final stage of complete relaxation of her powers of
tension, a state in which all energy will be transformed
into heat, in which there will be no different states but
only the most uniform distribution, in which also all
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
life and all movement will cease and the world-clock
itself will come to a standstill.
</p>

<p>
How does this fit in with the idea of independence
and self-sufficiency? How could the world-clock ever
wind itself up again to the original state of tension
which was simply there as if shot from a pistol <q>in the
beginning</q>? Where is the everlasting impressive uniformity
and constancy of the world? How does it
happen that the world-clock has not long ago come to
a standstill? For even if the original sum of potential
energy is postulated as infinite, the eternity that lies
behind us is also infinite. And so one infinity swallows
another. And innumerable questions of a similar
kind are continually presenting themselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The <q>Contingency</q> of the World.</head>

<p>
But we need not dwell in the meantime on these and
the many other difficulties and riddles presented by our
cosmological hypothesis. However these may be solved, a
general consideration will remain&mdash;namely, that whether
the world is governed by law or not, whether it is sufficient
unto itself or not, there <emph>is</emph> a world full of the most
diverse phenomena, and there <emph>are</emph> laws. Whence then
have both these come? Is it a matter of course, is it
quite obvious that they should exist at all, and that
they should be exactly as they are? We do not here
appeal without further ceremony to the saying <q>everything
must have a cause, therefore the world also.</q> It
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
is not absolutely correct. For instance, if the world
were so constituted that it would be impossible for it
not to exist, that the necessity for its existence and the
inconceivability of its non-existence were at once explicit
and obvious, then there would be no sense in
inquiring after a cause. In regard to a <q>necessary</q>
thing, if there were any such, we cannot ask, <q>Why,
and from what cause does this exist?</q> If it was necessary,
that implies that to think of it as not existing
would be ridiculous, and logically or metaphysically
impossible. Unfortunately there are no <q>necessary</q>
things, so that we cannot illustrate the case by
examples. But there are at least necessary truths
as distinguished from contingent truths. And thus
some light may be brought into the matter for the
inexpert. For instance, a necessary truth is contained
in the sentence, <q>Everything is equal to itself,</q> or,
<q>The shortest distance between two points is a straight
line.</q> We cannot even conceive of the contrary.
Therefore these axioms have no reasons, and can
neither be deduced nor proved. Every question as
to their reasons is quite meaningless. As examples of
a <q>contingent</q> truth we may take <q>It rains to-day,</q>
or <q>The earth revolves round the sun.</q> For neither
one nor the other of these is necessarily so. It is so as
a matter of fact, but under other circumstances it
might have been otherwise. The contrary can be conceived
of and represented, and has in itself an equal
degree of possibility. Therefore such a fact requires to
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
be and is capable of being reasoned out. I can and
must ask, <q>How does it happen that it rains to-day?
What are the reasons for it?</q> But as we must seek
for sufficient reasons for <q>contingent</q> truths, that is,
for those of which the contrary was equally possible, so
assuredly we must seek for sufficient causes for <q>contingent</q>
phenomena and events, those which can be
thought of as not existing, or as existing in a different
form. For these we must find causes and actual reasons.
Otherwise they have no foundation. The element of
<q>contingency</q> must be done away with; they must be
shown to result from sufficient causes. That is to say
nothing less than that they must be traced back to some
necessity. For it is one of the curious fundamental
convictions of our reason, and one in which all scientific
investigation has its ultimate roots, that what is <q>contingent</q>
is only apparently so, and in reality is in some
way or other based on necessity. Therefore reason
seeks causes for everything.
</p>

<p>
The search for causes involves showing that a thing
was necessary. And this must obviously apply to the
world as a whole. If it were quite obvious that the
world and its existence as it is were necessary, that is,
that it would be contrary to reason to think of the
world, and its phenomena, and their obedience to law as
non-existent, or as different from what they are, all
inquiry would be at an end. This would be <emph>the</emph> ultimate
necessity in which all the apparent contingency of
isolated phenomena and existences was firmly based.
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
But this is far from being the case. That anything
exists, and that the world exists, is for us absolutely the
greatest <q>contingency</q> of all, and in regard to it we
can and must continually ask, <q>Why does anything
exist at all, and why should it not rather be non-existent?</q>
Indeed, all our quest for sufficient causes
here reaches its climax. In more detail: that these
celestial systems and bodies, the ether, attraction and
gravitation should exist, and that everything should be
governed by definite laws, all literally <q>as if shot from
a pistol,</q> there must undoubtedly be some sufficient
reason, certain as it is that we shall never discover it.
It is true, as some one has said, that we live not only
in a very fortuitous world, but in an incredibly improbable
one. And this is not affected by the fact that
the world is completely governed by law. Law only confirms
it. The fact that all details may be clearly and
mathematically calculated in no way prevents them
from being fundamentally contingent. For they are
only so calculable on the basis of the given fundamental
characters of the world. And that is precisely
the problem: <q>Why do these characters exist and
not quite different ones, and why should any exist at
all?</q>
</p>

<p>
If any one should say: <q>Well, we must just content
ourselves with recognising the essentially <q>contingent</q>
nature of existence, for we shall never be able to get
beyond that,</q> he would be right in regard to the second
statement. To get beyond that and to see what it is&mdash;eternal
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
and in itself necessary&mdash;that lies at the basis of
this world of <q>contingency</q> is indeed impossible.
But he would be wrong as to the first part of the
assertion. For no one <emph>will</emph> <q>content himself.</q> For
that all chance is only apparently chance, and is
ultimately based in necessity, is a deeply-rooted and
fundamental conviction of our reason, one which
directs all scientific investigation, and which cannot
be ignored. It demands ceaselessly something necessary
as the permanent basis of contingent existence.
And this fact is and remains the truth involved in the
<q>cosmological proofs of the existence of God</q> of
former days. It was certainly erroneous to suppose
that <q>God</q> could be proved. For it is a long way
from that <q>idea of necessity</q> to religious experience
of God. And it was erroneous, too, to suppose that
anything could be really <q>proved.</q> What is necessary
can never really be proved from what is contingent.
But the recognition of the contingent nature of the
world is a stimulus that stirs up within our reason
the idea of the necessary, and it is a fact that reason
finds rest only in this idea.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Real World.</head>

<p>
(4.) What was stated separately in our first and second
propositions, and has hitherto been discussed, now
unites and culminates in the fourth. For if we note
the vital expressions of religion wherever it occurs, we
find above all one thing as its most characteristic sign,
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
indeed as its very essence, in all places and all times,
often only as a scarce uttered wish or longing, but
often breaking forth with impetuous might. This one
thing is the impulse and desire to get beyond time and
space, and beyond the oppressive narrowness and
crampingness of the world surrounding us, the desire
to see into the depth and <q>other side</q> of things and
of existence. For it is the very essence of religion to
distinguish this world from, and contrast it as insufficient
with the real world which is sufficient, to
regard this world which we see and know and possess
as only an image, as only transiently real, in contrast
with the real world of true being which is believed in.
Religion has clothed this essential feature in a hundred
mythologies and eschatologies, and one has always
given place to another, the more sublimed to the more
robust. But the fundamental feature itself cannot
disappear.
</p>

<p>
In apologetics and dogmatics the interest in this
matter is often concentrated more or less exclusively
upon the question of <q>immortality.</q> Wrongly so,
however, for this quest after the real world is not a
final chapter in religion, it is religion itself. And in
the religious sense the question of immortality is only
justifiable and significant when it is a part of the
general religious conviction that this world is not the
truly essential world, and that the true nature of
things, and of our own being, is deeper than we can
comprehend, and lies beyond this side of things, beyond
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
time and space. To the religious mind it cannot be of
great importance whether existence is to be continued
for a little at least beyond this life. In what way
would such a wish be religious? But the inward conviction
that <q>all that is transitory is only a parable,</q>
that all here is only a veil and a curtain, and the
desire to get beyond semblance to truth, beyond insufficiency
to sufficiency, concentrate themselves especially
in the assertion of the eternity of our true being.
</p>

<p>
It is with this characteristic of religion that the
spirit and method of naturalism contrast so sharply.
Naturalism points out with special satisfaction that
this depth of things, this home of the soul is nowhere
discoverable. The great discoveries of Copernicus,
Kepler, and Newton have done away with the possibility
of that. No empyrean, no corner of the world remains
available. Even the attempted flight to sun, moon, or
stars does not help. It is true that the newly discovered
world is without end, but, beyond a doubt, in
its outermost and innermost depths it is a world of
space and time. Even in the stellar abysses <q>everything
is just the same as with us.</q>
</p>

<p>
All this is doubtless correct, and it is very wholesome
for religion. For it prompts religion no longer to
seek its treasure, the true nature of things, and its
everlasting home in time and space, as the mythologies
and eschatologies have sought them repeatedly. It
throws religion back on the fundamental insight and
on the convictions which it had attained long before
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
philosophy and criticism of knowledge had arrived at
similar views: namely, that time and space, and this
world of time and space, do not comprise the whole of
existence, nor existence as it really is, but are only a
manifestation of it to our finite and limited knowledge.
Before the days of modern astronomy, and without its
help, religion knew that God was not confined to
<q>heaven,</q> or anywhere in space, and that time as it is
for us was not for Him. Even in the terms <q>eternity</q>
and <q>infinity</q> it shows an anticipatory knowledge of
a being and reality above time and space. These ideas
were not gained from a contemplation of nature, but
before it and from independent sources.
</p>

<p>
But though it is by no means the task of apologetics
to build up these ideas directly from a study of things,
it is of no little importance to inquire whether religion
possesses in these convictions only postulates of faith,
for which it must laboriously and forcibly make a
place in the face of knowledge, or whether a thorough
and self-critical knowledge does not rather confirm
them, and show us, within the world of knowledge
itself, unmistakable signs that it cannot be the true,
full reality, but points to something beyond itself.
</p>

<p>
To study this question thoroughly would involve
setting forth a special theory of knowledge and existence.
This cannot be attempted here. But Kant's great
doctrine of the <q>Antinomy of Reason</q> has for all
time broken up for us the narrowness of the naturalistic
way of thinking. Every one who has felt cramped by
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
the narrow limits in which reality was confined by a
purely mundane outlook must have experienced the
liberating influence of the Kantian Antinomy if he has
thought over it carefully. The thick curtain which
separates being from appearance seems to be torn
away, or at any rate to reveal itself as a curtain. Kant
shows that, if we were to take this world as it lies before
us for the true reality, we should land in inextricable
contradictions. These contradictions show that the
true world itself cannot coincide with our thought and
comprehension, for in being itself there can be no
contradictions. Otherwise it would not exist. The
ancient problems of philosophy, from the time of the
Eleatic school onwards, find here their adequate formulation.
Kant's disciple, Fries, has carried the matter
further, and has attempted to develop what for Kant
still remained a sort of embarrassment of reason to more
precise pronouncements as to the relation of true being
to its manifestation,
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Antimony of Our Conception of Time.</head>

<p>
A few examples may serve to make the point clear.
The first of the antinomies is also the most impressive.
It brings before us the insufficiency of our
conceptions of time, and shows the impossibility of
transferring, from the world as it appears to us, to real
Being any mode of conceiving time which we possess.
The difficulty is, whether we are to think of our world
as having had a beginning or not. The naïve outlook
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
will at once assume without further ado a beginning of
all things. Everything must have had a beginning,
though that may have been a very long time ago. But
on more careful reflection it is found impossible to
imagine this, and then the assumption that things had
no beginning is made with as little scruple. Let us
suppose that the beginning of things was six thousand,
or, what is quite as easy, six thousand billion years ago.
We are at once led to ask what there was the year
before or many years before, and what there was before
that again, and so on until we face the infinite and
beginningless. Thus we find that we have never really
thought of a beginning of things, and never could think
of it, but that our thinking always carries us into the
infinite. Time, at any rate, we have thought of as
infinite. We may then amuse ourselves by trying to
conceive of endless time as empty, but we shall hardly
be able to give any reason for arriving at that idea.
If time goes back to infinity, it seems difficult to see
why it should not always have been filled, instead of
only being so filled from some arbitrary point. And
in any case the very fact of the existence of time
makes the problem of beginning or not beginning
insoluble. For such reasons Aristotle asserted that
the world had no beginning, and rejected the contrary
idea as childish.
</p>

<p>
But the idea of no beginning is also childish or
rather impossible, and in reality inconceivable. For if
it be assumed that the world and time have never had
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
a beginning, there stretches back from the time at which
I now find myself a past eternity. It must have passed
completely as a whole, for otherwise this particular
point in time could never have been arrived at. So
that I must think of an infinity which nevertheless
comes to an end. I cannot do this. It would be like
wooden iron.
</p>

<p>
The matter sounds simple but is nevertheless difficult
in its consequences. It confronts us at once with the
fact, confirmed by the theory of knowledge, that time as
we know it is an absolutely necessary and fundamental
form of our conceptions and knowledge, but is likewise
the veil over what is concealed, and cannot be carried
over in the same form into the true nature of things.
As the limits and contradictions in the time-conception
reveal themselves to us, there wakes in us the idea which
we accept as the analogue of time in true being, an idea
of existence under the form of <q>eternity,</q> which, since
we are tied down to temporal concepts, cannot be
expressed or even thought of with any content.<note place='foot'>Not
even after the scholastic manner of regarding eternity as a
<q>nunc stans,</q> a stationary now, an everlasting present. <q>Present</q> is
a moment in our own time, and an <q>everlasting</q> present is nonsense.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Antimony of the Conditioned and the
Unconditioned.</head>

<p>
The antinomy of the conditioned and the unconditioned
leads us along similar lines. Every individual
finite thing or event is dependent on its causes and
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
conditions, which precede it or co-exist in inter-relation
with it. It is conditioned, and is only possible
through its conditions. But that implies that it can
only occur or be granted when all its conditions are
first given in complete synthesis. If any one of
them failed, it would not have come about. But
every one of its conditioning circumstances is in its
turn conditioned by innumerable others, and every one
of these again by others, and so on into the infinite,
backwards and on all sides, so that here again something
without end and incapable of end must have
come to an end, and must be thought of as having
an end, before any event whatever can really come to
pass. But this again is a sheer impossibility for our
thinking: we require and must demand something
completed, because now is really now, and something
happens now, and yet in the world as it appears to us
we are always forced to face what cannot have an end.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Antimony of Our Conception of Space.</head>

<p>
To bring our examples to a conclusion, we find
the same sort of antinomy in regard to space, and the
world as it is extended in space. Here, too, it becomes
apparent that space as we imagine it, and as we carry it
with us as a concept for arranging our sense-impressions,
cannot correspond to the true reality. As in regard to
time, so also in regard to space, we can never after any
distance however enormous come to a halt and say, <q>Here
is the end of space.</q> Whether we think of the diameter
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
of the earth's orbit or the distance to Sirius, and multiply
them by a million we always ask, <q>What lies behind?</q>
and so extend space into the infinite. And as a matter
of course we people it also without end with heavenly
bodies, stars, nebulae, Milky Ways and the like. For
here again there can be no obvious reason why space in
our neighbourhood should be filled, while space at a
greater distance should be thought of as empty. Therefore
we actually think of star beyond star, and, as far as
we can reckon, stars beyond that without end. For
space extends not merely so far, but always farther.
And the number of the stars is not so many, but always
one more. This sounds quite obvious, but it has exactly
the same impossibility as we found in our <q>past infinity.</q>
For although we are carried by our conceptions into the
infinite, and to what never could have an end, it is
impossible to assume the same of reality.
</p>

<p>
It is remarkable and quite characteristic that the
whole difficulty and its peculiar nature become much
more intelligible to us through the familiar images and
expressions of religion. There we readily admit that
we cannot comprehend the number of the stars and
stellar spaces, because for us they never reach an end,
there being always one more; but that in the eyes of
God all is embraced in His universality, in a <q>perfect
synthesis,</q> and that to Him Being is never and in no
point <q>always one more.</q> God does not count.
</p>

<p>
Without the help of religious expressions we say:
Being itself is always itself and never implies any more;
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
for if there were <q>always one more</q> it would not be
Being. It can only exist <q>as a perfect synthesis,</q>
which does not mean an endless number, which nevertheless
somewhere comes to an end&mdash;again wooden iron&mdash;but
something above all reckoning and beyond all
number, as it is beyond space and time. And that
which we are able to weigh and measure and number is
therefore not reality itself, but only its inadequate
manifestation to our limited capacity for understanding.
</p>

<p>
But enough of this. The puzzles in the doctrines of
the simple and the complex, of the causeless and the
caused, into which this world of ours forces us, should
teach us further to recognise it for what it is&mdash;insufficient
and pointing beyond itself,&mdash;to its own transcendent
depths. So, too, the problems that arise when we
penetrate farther and farther into the ever more and
more minute, and the indefiniteness of our thought-horizons
in general should have the same effect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Intuitions of Reality.</head>

<p>
(5.) There are other evidences of this depth and
hidden nature of things, towards which an examination
of our knowledge points. For <q>in feeling and intuition
appearance points beyond itself to real being.</q> So ran
our fifth proposition. This subject indeed is delicate,
and can only be treated of in the hearing of willing
ears. But all apologetic counts upon willing ears; it
is not conversion of doubters that is aimed at, it is
religion which seeks to reassure itself. Our proposition
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
does not speak of dreams but of facts, which are not
the less facts because they are more subtle than others.
What we are speaking of are the deep impressions,
which cannot properly be made commensurable at all,
which may spring up directly out of an inward experience,
an apprehension of nature, the world and history,
in the depths of the spirit. They call forth in us an
<q>anamnesis,</q> a <q>reminiscence</q> in Plato's sense, awakening
within us moods and intuitions in which something
of the essence and meaning of being is directly experienced,
although it remains in the form of feeling,
and cannot easily, if at all, find expression in definable
ideas or clear statements. Fries, in his book,
<q>Wissen, Glaube, und Ahnung,</q> unhappily too much
forgotten, takes account of this fact, for he places this
region of spiritual experience beside the certainties of
faith and knowledge, and regards these as <q>animated</q>
by it. He has in mind especially the impressions of the
beautiful and the sublime which far transcend our
knowledge of nature, and to which knowledge and its
concepts can never do adequate justice, facts though
they undoubtedly are. In them we experience directly,
in intuitive feeling, that the reality is greater than our
power of understanding, and we feel something of its
true nature and meaning. The utterances of Schleiermacher<note place='foot'><q>Reden
über die Religion, an die Gebildeten unter ihren Verächtern.</q>
Neu herausgegeben von R. Otto. 1906.</note>
in regard to religion follow the same lines.
For this is precisely what he means when he insists
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
that the universe must be experienced in intuition and
feeling as well as in knowing and doing. He is less
incisive in his expressions than Fries, but wider in ideas.
He includes in this domain of <q>intuitive feeling</q> not
only the aesthetic experiences of the beautiful and sublime,
but takes the much more general and comprehensive
view, that the receptive mind may gather from the finite
impressions of the infinite, and may through its experiences
of time gain some conception of the eternal. And
he rightly emphasises, that such intuition has its true
place in the sphere of mind and in face of the events of
history, rather than in the outer court of nature. He,
too, lays stress on the fact that doctrinal statements
and ideas cannot be formulated out of such subtle
material.
</p>

<p>
The experience of which we are speaking may be most
directly and impressively gained from the great, the
powerful, the sublime in nature. It may be gained from
the contemplation of nature's harmonies and beauties,
but also of her overflowing abundance and her enigmatical
dæmonic strength, from the purposeful intelligibility
as well as the terrifying and bewildering enigmas of
nature's operations, from all the manifold ways in which
the mind is affected and startled, from all the suggestive
but indefinable sensations which may be roused in us
by the activity of nature, and which rise through a
long scale to intoxicated self-forgetfulness and wordless
ecstasy before her beauty, and her half-revealed, half-concealed
mystery. If any or all of these be stirred up
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
in a mind which is otherwise godless or undevout, it
remains an indefinite, vacillating feeling, bringing with
it nothing else. But in the religious mind it immediately
unites with what is akin to it or of similar nature,
and becomes worship. No dogmas or arguments for
disputatious reasoning can be drawn from it. It can
hardly even be expressed, except, perhaps, in music.
And if it be expressed it tends easily to become fantastic
or romantic pomposity, as is shown even by
certain parts of the writings of Schleiermacher himself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Recognition of Purpose.</head>

<p>
(6.) We must now turn to the question of <q>teleology.</q>
Only now, not because it is a subordinate
matter, for it is in reality the main one, but because it
is the culminating point, not the starting point, of our
argument. If the world be from God and of God, it
and all that it contains must be for some definite purpose
and for special ends. It must be swayed by eternal
ideas, and must be subject to divine providence and
guidance. But naturalism, and even, it appears, natural
science, declares: Neither purposes nor ideas are of
necessity to be assumed in nature. They do not occur
either in the details or in the whole. The whole is an
absolutely closed continuity of causes, a causal but blind
machinery, in regard to which we cannot ask, What is
meant to be produced by this? but only, What causes have
produced what exists? This opposition goes deep and
raises difficulties. And in all vindication or defence
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
of religion it ought rightly to be kept in the foreground
of attention, although the points we have already insisted
on have been wrongly overlooked. The opposition
concentrates itself to-day almost entirely around
two theories of naturalism, which do not, indeed, set
forth the whole case, but which are certainly typical
examples, so that, if we analyse them, we shall have
arrived at an orientation of the fundamental points
at issue. The two doctrines are Darwinism and the
mechanical theory of life, and it is to these that we
must now turn our attention. And since the best
elucidation and criticism of both theories is to be found
in their own history, and in the present state of
opinion within their own school, we shall have to combine
our study of their fundamental principles with that
of their history.
</p>

<p>
We can here set forth, however, only the chief point
of view, the gist of the matter, which will continue to
exist and hold good however the analysis of details may
turn out. For the kernel of the question may be
discussed independently, without involving the particular
interests of zoology or biology, though we shall
constantly come across particular and concrete cases of
the main problem in our more detailed study.
</p>

<p>
The struggle against, and the aversion to ideas and
purposes on the part of the nature-interpreters is not in
itself directed against religion. It does not arise from
any antagonism of natural science to the religious conception
of the world, but is primarily an antagonism of
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
one school of science to another, the modern against
the mediæval-Aristotelian. The latter, again, was not
in itself a religious world-outlook, it was simply an
attempt at an interpretation of the processes of nature,
and especially of evolution, which might be quite
neutral towards religion, or might be purely naturalistic.
It was the theory of Entelechies and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formæ substaniales</foreign>.
In order to explain how a thing had come to
be, it taught that the idea of the finished thing, the
<q>form,</q> was implicit in it from the very beginning, and
determined the course of its development. This
<q>form,</q> the end aimed at in development, was <q>potentially,</q>
<q>ideally,</q> or <q>virtually</q> implicit in the thing
from the beginning, was the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa finalis</foreign>,
the ultimate cause which determined the development. Modern
natural science objects to this theory that it offers no
explanation, but merely gives a name to what has to
be explained. The aim of science, it tells us, is to
elucidate the play of causes which brought about a
particular result. The hypothetical
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa finalis</foreign> it
regards as a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>asylum ignorantiæ</foreign>, and as the
problem itself not as its solution. For instance, if we
inquire into the present form and aspect of the earth,
nothing is advanced by stating that the <q>form,</q> the
primitive model of the evolving earth was implicit in it
from the beginning, and that it gradually determined
the phases and transition-stages of its evolution, until
the ultimate state, the end aimed at, was attained.
The task of science is, through geology, geognosy,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
mineralogy, geodesy, physical geography, meteorology,
and other sciences to discover the physical, chemical,
and mechanical causes of the earth's evolution and their
laws, and from the co-operation of these to interpret
everything in detail and as a whole.
</p>

<p>
Whether modern natural science is right in this or
not, whether or not it has neglected an element of
truth in the old theory of Entelechies which it
cannot dispense with, especially in regard to living
organisms, it is beyond dispute that, from the most
general point of view, and in particular with reference
to teleology, religion does not need to concern itself in
the least about this opposition. <q>Purposes,</q> <q>ideas,</q>
<q>guidance</q> in the religious sense, are quite unaffected
by the manner in which the result is realised; everything
depends upon the special and particular value of
what has been attained or realised. If a concatenation
of causes and stages of development lead to results in
which we suddenly discern a special and particular
value, then, and not till then, have we a reason and
criterion for our assumption that it is not simply
a result of a play of chances, but that it has been
brought about by purposeful thought, by higher intervention
and guidance of things. Certainly not before
then. Thus we can only speak of purposes, aims,
guidance, and creation in so far as we have within us
the capacity for feeling and recognising the value,
meaning and significance of things. But natural
science itself cannot estimate these. It can or will only
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
examine how everything has come about, but whether
this result has a higher value than another, or has a
lower, or none at all, it can neither assert nor deny.
That lies quite outside of its province.
</p>

<p>
Let us try to make this clear by taking at once the
highest example&mdash;man and his origin. Let it be
assumed that natural science could discover all the
causes and factors which, operating for many thousands
of years, have produced man and human existence.
Even if these causes and factors had actually been pure
<q>ideas,</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formæ substantiales</foreign>
and the like, that would
in no way determine whether the whole process was
really subject to a divine idea of purpose or not. If we
had not gained, from a different source, an insight
into the supreme and incomparable worth of human
existence, spiritual, rational, and free, with its capacity
for morality, religion, art and science, we should be
compelled to regard man, along with every other
natural result, as the insignificant product of a blind
play of nature. But, on the other hand, if we have
once felt and recognised this value of human existence,
its highest dignity, the knowledge that man has been
produced through a play of highly complex natural
processes, fulfilling themselves in absolute obedience to
law, in no way prevents our regarding him as a <q>purpose,</q>
as the realisation of a divine idea, in accordance
with which nature in its orderliness was planned. In
fact, this consideration leads us to discover and admire
eternal plan and divine guidance in nature.
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
For it does not rest with natural science either to
discover or to deny <q>purpose</q> in the religious sense in
nature; it belongs to quite a different order of experience,
an entirely inward one. Just in proportion as I
become aware of, and acknowledge in the domain of my
inward experience and through my capacity of estimating
values, the worth of the spiritual and moral life
of man, so, with the confidence of this peculiar mode of
conviction, I subordinate the concatenations of events
and causes on which the possibility and the occurrence of
the spiritual and moral life depend, to an eternal teleology,
and see the order of the world that leads to this
illuminated by everlasting meaning and by providence.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Teleological and Scientific Interpretations
are Alike Necessary.</head>

<p>
(7.) Thus religion confidently subjects the world to
a teleological interpretation. And to a teleological
study in this sense the strictly causal interpretations of
natural science are not hostile, but indispensable. For
how do things stand? Natural science endeavours by
persistent labour to comprehend the whole of the facts
occurring in our world, up to the existence of man,
as the final outcome and result of an age-long process
of evolution, attempts also to follow this process ever
higher up the ladder of strictly causal and strictly law-governed
sequences, and finally to connect it with the
primary and simplest fundamental facts of existence,
beyond which it cannot go, and which must simply be
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
accepted as <q>given.</q> If these results of this causally
interpreted evolution reveal themselves to our inward
power of valuation as full of meaning and value, indeed
of the deepest and most incomparable value, the causal
mode of explanation is in no way affected, but its
results are all at once placed in a new light and reveal
a peculiarity which was previously not discoverable,
yet which is their highest import. They become a
strictly united system of <emph>means</emph>. And purposefulness
as a potentiality is thus carried back to the very
foundation and <q>beginning,</q> to the fundamental conditions
and primary factors of the cosmos itself. The
strict nexus of conditions and causes is thus nothing
more than the <q>endeavour after end and aim,</q> the
carrying through and realisation of the eternal purpose,
which was implicit potentially in the fundamental
nature of things. The absolute obedience to law, and
the inexorableness of chains of sequence are, instead of
being fatal to this position, indispensable to it. When
there is a purpose in view, it is only where the system
of means is perfect, unbroken, and absolute, that the
purpose can be realised, and therefore that intention
can be inferred. In the inexplicable datum of the
fundamental factors of the world's existence, in the
strict nexus of causes, in the unfailing occurrence of the
results which are determined by both these, and which
reveal themselves to us as of value and purpose, teleology
and providence are directly realised. The only
assumptions are, that it is possible to judge the results
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
according to their value, and that both the original
nature of the world and the system of its causal sequences&mdash;that
is, the world as we know it&mdash;can be conceived of
in accordance with the ideas of dependence and conditionedness.
Both assumptions are not only possible,
but necessary.
</p>

<p>
In thinking out this most general consideration, we
find the real and fundamental answer to the question
as to the validity and freedom of the religious conception
of the world with regard to teleology in nature.
And if it be held fast and associated with the insight
into the autonomy of the spiritual and its underivability
from the natural, we are freed at once from all the
petty strife with the naturalistic doctrines of evolution,
descent, and struggle for existence. We shall nevertheless
be obliged to discuss these to some extent,
because it is not a matter of indifference whether the
detailed study of natural evolution fits in more or less
easily with the conception of purpose whose validity
we have demonstrated in general. If that proves to be
the case, it will be an important factor in apologetics.
The conclusion which we have already arrived at on
abstract grounds will then be corroborated and emphasised
in the concrete.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Darwinism In General.</head>

<p>
Darwinism, which was originally a technical theory of
the biological schools, has long since become a veritable
tangle of the most diverse problems and opinions, and
seems to press hardly upon the religious conception of
the world from many different sides. In its theory of
blind <q>natural selection</q> and the fortuitous play of
the factors in the struggle for existence, it appears to
surrender the whole of this wonderful world of life to
the rough and ready grip of a process without method
or plan. In the general theory of evolution and the
doctrine of the descent of even the highest from the
lowest, it seems to take away all special dignity from the
human mind and spirit, all the freedom and all the
nobility of pure reason and free will; it seems to reduce
the higher products of religion, morality, poetry, and
the æsthetic sense to the level of an ignoble tumult
of animal impulses, desires and sensations. Purely
speculative questions relative to the evolution theory,
psychological and metaphysical, logical and epistemological,
ethical, æsthetic, and finally even historical and
politico-economical questions have been drawn into the
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
coil, and usually receive from the Darwinians an answer
at once robust and self-assured. A zoological theory
seems suddenly to have thrown light and intelligibility
into the most diverse provinces of knowledge.
</p>

<p>
But in point of fact it can be shown that Darwinism
has not really done this and cannot do it. It leaves
unaffected the problem of the mind with its peculiar
and underivable laws, from the logical to the
ethical. Whether it be right or wrong in its physiological
theories, its genealogical trees and fortuitous
factors, preoccupation with this theory is a task of the
second order. Nevertheless it is necessary to study it,
because the chief objections to the religious interpretation
of the world have come from it.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Development of Darwinism.</head>

<p>
In studying it we should like to follow a method
somewhat different from that usually observed in apologetic
writings. <q>Darwinism,</q> even in its technical,
biological form, never was quite, and is to-day not at
all a unified and consistent system. It has been modified
in so many ways and presented in such different
colours, that we must either refrain altogether from
attempting to get into close quarters with it, or we must
make ourselves acquainted to some extent with the phases
of the theory as it has gradually developed up to the
present day. This is the more necessary and useful
since it is precisely within the circle of technical experts
that revolts from and criticisms of the Darwinian theory
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
have in recent years arisen; and these are so incisive, so
varied, and so instructive, that through them we can
adjust our standpoint in relation to the theory better
than in any other way. And in thus letting the
biologists speak for themselves, we are spared the fatal
task of entering into the discussion of questions belonging
to a region outside our own particular studies.
</p>

<p>
We cannot, however, give more than a short sketch.
But even such a sketch may do more towards giving us
a general knowledge of the question and showing us a
way out of the difficulties it raises than any of the
current <q>refutations.</q> To supplement this sketch, and
facilitate a thorough understanding of the problem, we
shall give somewhat fuller references than are usual to
the relevant literature. And the same method will be
pursued in the following chapter, which deals with the
mechanical theory of life. This method throws more
upon the reader, but it is probably the most satisfactory
one for the serious student.
</p>

<p>
The reactions from the Darwinism of the schools
which we have just referred to, and to which the second
half of this chapter is devoted, are, of course, of a
purely scientific kind. And while we are devoting our
attention to them, we must not be unfaithful to the
canon laid down in the previous chapter, namely that
with reference to the question of teleology in the
religious sense no real answer can be looked for from
scientific study, not even if it be anti-Darwinian. In
this case, too, it is impossible to read the convictions
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
and intuitions of the religious conception of the world
out of a scientific study of nature: they precede it.
But here, too, we may find some accessory support and
indirect corroboration more or less strong and secure.
This may be illustrated by a single example. It will
be shown that, on closer study, it is not impossible to
subordinate even the apparently confused tangle of
naturalistic factors of evolution which are summed up
in the phrase <q>struggle for existence</q> to interpretation
from the religious point of view. But matters will be
in quite a different position if the whole theory collapses,
and instead of evolution and its paths being
given over to confusion and chance, it appears that
from the very beginning and at every point there is a
predetermination of fixed and inevitable lines along and
up which it must advance. In many other connections
considerations of a like nature will reveal themselves
to us in the course of our study.
</p>

<p>
Darwinism, as popularly understood, is the theory
that <q>men are descended from monkeys,</q> and in general
that the higher forms of life are descended from the
lower, and it is regarded as Darwin's epoch-making
work and his chief merit&mdash;or fault according to the point
of view&mdash;that he established the Theory of Descent. This
is only half correct, and it leaves out the real point of
Darwinism altogether. The Theory of Descent had its
way prepared by the evolutionist ideas and the speculative
nature-philosophy of Goethe, Schelling, Hegel
and Oken; by the suggestions and glimmerings of the
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
nature-mysticism of the romanticists; by the results of
comparative anatomy and physiology; was already
hinted at, at least as far as derivation of species was
concerned, in the works of Linné himself; was worked
out in the <q>zoological philosophies,</q> by the elder
Darwin, by Lamarck, Etienne Geoffrey St. Hilaire and
Buffon; was in the field long before Charles Darwin's
time; was already in active conflict with the antagonistic
theory of the <q>constancy of species,</q> and had its more or
less decided adherents. Yet undoubtedly it was through
and after Darwin that the theory grew so much more
powerful and gained general acceptance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Darwinism and Teleology.</head>

<p>
But the essential and most characteristic importance
of Darwin and his work, the reason for which he was
called the Newton of biology, and which makes Darwinism
at once interesting and dangerous to the religious
conception of the world, is something quite special and
new. It is its radical opposition to teleology. Du Bois-Reymond,
in his witty lecture <q>Darwin versus Galiani,</q><note place='foot'>Kgl.
Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1876.</note>
explains the gist of the matter. <q>Les dés de la nature
sont pipés</q> (nature's dice are loaded). Nature is
almost always throwing aces. She brings forth not
what is meaningless and purposeless, but in great
preponderance what is full of meaning and purpose.
What <q>loaded</q> her dice like this? Even if the
theory of descent be true, in what way does it directly
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
help the purely scientific interpretation of the world?
Would not this evolution from the lowest to the
highest simply be a series of the most astonishing lucky
throws of the dice by which in perplexing <q>endeavour
after an aim,</q> the increasingly perfect, and ultimately
the most perfect is produced? And, on the other hand,
every individual organism, from the Amœba up to the
most complex vertebrate, is, in its structure, its form, its
functions, a stupendous marvel of adaptation to its end
and of co-ordination of the parts to the whole, and of
the whole and its parts to the functions of the organism,
the functions of nutrition, self-maintenance, reproduction,
maintenance of the species, and so on. How account
for the adaptiveness, both general and special, without
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causæ finales</foreign>, without intention and purposes,
without guidance towards a conscious aim? How can
it be explained as the necessary result solely of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causæ
efficientes</foreign>, of blindly working causes without a definite
aim? Darwinism attempts to answer this question.
And its answer is: <q>What appears to us <q>purposeful</q>
and <q>perfect</q> is in truth only the manifold adaptation
of the forms of life to the conditions of their existence.
And this adaptation is brought about solely by means
of these conditions themselves. Without choice,
without aim, without conscious purpose nature offers a
wealth of possibilities. The conditions of existence act
as a sieve. What chances to correspond to them maintains
itself, gliding through the meshes of the sieve,
what does not perishes.</q> It is an old idea of the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
naturalistic philosophies, dating from Empedocles, which
Darwin worked up into the theory of <q>natural selection</q>
through <q>the survival of the fittest</q> <q>in the
struggle for existence.</q> Of course the assumption
necessary to his idea is that the forms of life are capable
of variation, and of continually offering in ceaseless flux
new properties and characters to the sieve of selection,
and of being raised thereby from the originally homogeneous
to the heterogeneous, from the simple to the
complex, from the lower to the higher. This is the
theory of descent, and it is, of course, an essential part
and the very foundation of Darwin's theory. But it is
<emph>the doctrine of descent based upon natural selection</emph>
that is Darwinism itself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Characteristic Features of Darwinism.</head>

<p>
We do not propose to expound the Darwinian
theory for the hundredth time; a knowledge of it
must be taken for granted. We need only briefly
call to mind the characteristic features and catchwords
of the theory as Darwin founded it, which have also
been the starting points of subsequent modifications
and controversies.
</p>

<p>
All living creatures are bound together in genetic
solidarity. Everything has evolved through endless
deviations, gradations, and differentiations, but at the
same time by a perfectly continuous process. Variation
continually produced a crop of heterogeneous novelties.
The struggle for existence sifted these out. Heredity
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
fixed and established them. Without method or plan
variations continue to occur (indefinite variations). They
manifest themselves in all manner of minute changes
(<q>fluctuating</q> variations). Every part, every function
of an organism may be subject individually to variation
and selection. The world is strictly governed by what
is useful. The whole organisation as well as the individual
organs and functions bear the stamp of utility,
at least, they must bear it if the theory is correct. In
the general continuity the transitions are always easy;
there are no fundamentally distinct <q>types,</q> architectural
plans, or groups of forms. Where gaps yawn
the intermediate links have gone amissing. There is
no fundamental difference between <emph>genus</emph>, <emph>species</emph>, and
<emph>variety</emph>. Even the most complicated organ such as
the eye, the most puzzling function such as the
instinct of the bee, may be explained as the outcome
of many more primitive stages.
</p>

<p>
The chief evidences of the theory of descent are
to be found in homologies, in the correspondences of
organs and functions, as revealed by comparative
anatomy and physiology, in the recapitulation revealed
by embryology, in the structure of parasites, in
rudimentary organs and reversions to earlier stages, in
the distribution of animals and plants, and in the possibility
of still transforming, at least to a slight extent,
one species into another, by experimental breeding.
</p>

<p>
Transformation and differentiation go on in nature
as a vast, ceaseless, but blind process of selection. In
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
artificial selection evolution is secured by choosing the
most fit for breeding purposes; so it is secured in
natural selection by the favouring and survival of those
forms which are the most fit among the many unfit or
less fit, which happened to be exposed to the struggle for
existence, that is, to the competition for the means of
subsistence, to the struggle with enemies, to hostile
environment, and to dangers of every kind. The
adaptation thus brought about is of a purely <q>passive</q>
kind. The variations arise fortuitously out of the
organism, and present themselves for selection in the
struggle for existence; they are not actively acquired by
means of the struggle. The secondary factors of evolution
recognised are: correlation in the growth and in
the development of parts, the origin of new characters
through use, their disappearance through disuse
(Lamarck), the transmission of characters thus acquired,
the influence of environment and sexual selection.<note place='foot'>Some
of these subsidiary factors are difficult to harmonise with
the main principle of selection; they endanger it or it endangers
them, as we shall see when we consider the controversies within the
Darwinian camp.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Darwinian theory, the interpretation of the teleological
in the animate world by means of the theory of
descent based upon natural selection, entered like a
ferment into the scientific thought-movement, and in
a space of forty years it has itself passed through a series
of stages, differentiations, and transformations which
have in part resulted in the present state of the theory,
and have in part anticipated it. These are represented
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
by the names of workers belonging to a generation which
has for the most part already passed away: Darwin's
collaborateurs, such as Alfred Russel Wallace, who independently
and simultaneously expounded the theory of
natural selection, Haeckel and Fritz Müller, Nägeli and
Askenasy, von Kölliker, Mivart, Romanes and others.
The differentiation and elaboration of Darwin's theories
has gone ever farther and farther; the grades and
shades of doctrine held by his disciples are now almost
beyond reckoning.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Various Forms of Darwinism.</head>

<p>
The great majority of these express what may be
called popular Darwinism [<q>Darwinismus vulgaris</q>],
theoretically worthless, but practically possessed of
great powers of attraction and propagandism. It
expresses in the main a conviction, usually left
unexplained, that everything <q>happens naturally,</q> that
man is really descended from monkeys, and that life has
<q>evolved from lower stages</q> of itself, that dualism is
wrong, and that monism is the truth. It is exactly the
standpoint of the popular naturalism we have already
described, which here mingles unsuspectingly and without
scruple Lamarckian and other principles with the
Darwinian, which is enthusiastic on the one hand over
the <q>purely mechanical</q> interpretation of nature, and on
the other drags in directly psychical motives, unconscious
consciousness, impulses, spontaneous self-differentiation
of organisms, which nevertheless adheres to <q>monism</q>
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
and possibly even professes to share Goethe's conception
of nature!
</p>

<p>
Above this stratum we come to that of the real
experts, the only one which concerns us in the least.
Here too we find an ever-growing distance between
divergent views, the most manifold differences amounting
sometimes to mutual exclusion. These differences occur
even with reference to the fundamental doctrine generally
adhered to, the doctrine of descent. To one party it is
a proved fact, to another a probable, scientific working
hypothesis, to a third a <q>rescuing plank.</q> One party
is always finding fresh corroborations, another new
difficulties. And within the same group we find the
contrasts of believers in monophyletic and believers in
polyphyletic evolution, the mechanists and the half-confessed
or thoroughgoing vitalists, the preformationists
and the believers in epigenesis. Opinions differ
even more widely in regard to the <hi rend='italic'>rôle</hi> of the <q>struggle
for existence</q> in the production of species. On the one
hand we have the Darwinism of Darwin freed from
inconsequent additions and formulated as orthodox
<q>neo-Darwinism</q>; on the other hand we have heterodox
Lamarckism. The <q>all-sufficiency</q> of natural selection
is proclaimed by some, its impotence by others. Indefinite
variation is opposed by orthogenesis, fluctuating
variation by saltatory mutation (Halmatogenesis in
<q>Greek</q>), passive adaptation by the spontaneous
activity and self-regulation of the living organism.
The struggle for existence is variously regarded as the
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
chief factor, or as a co-operating factor, or as an
indifferent, or even an inimical factor in the origination
of new species.
</p>

<p>
And among the representatives of these different
standpoints there are most interesting personal differences:
in some, like Weismann, we find a great loyalty
to, and persistence in the position once arrived at, in
others the most surprising transitions and changes of
opinion. Thus Fleischmann, a pupil of Selenka's, after
illustrating during many years of personal research
the orthodox Darwinian standpoint, finally developed
into an outspoken opponent not only of the theory of
selection but of the doctrine of descent. So also Friedmann.<note place='foot'>H.
Friedmann, <q>Die Konvergenz der Organismen,</q> Berlin,
1904.</note>
Driesch started from the mechanical theory
of life and advanced through the connected series of his
own biological essays to vitalism. Romanes, a prominent
disciple of Darwin, ended in Christian theism,
and Wallace, the discoverer of <q>the struggle for existence,</q>
landed in spiritualism.
</p>

<p>
Nothing like an exhaustive view of the present state
of Darwinism and its many champions can here be
attempted. But it will be necessary to get to know
what we may call its possibilities by a study of typical
and leading examples. In the course of our study many
of the problems to which the theory gives rise will
reveal themselves, and their orientation will be possible.
</p>

<p>
This task falls naturally into two subdivisions: (1) the
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
present state of the theory of Evolution and Descent,
and how far the religious conception of the world is or is
not affected by it; (2) the truth as to the originative and
directive factors of Evolution, especially as to <q>natural
selection in the struggle for existence,</q> whether they are
tenable and sufficient, and what attitude religion must
take towards them. These two problems must be kept
distinct throughout, and must be discussed in order.
For the validity of what is characteristically <emph>Darwinism</emph>
is in no way decided by proving descent and evolution,
although it appears so in most popular expositions.<note place='foot'>It
is somewhat confusing that even Weismann in his most recent
work professes to give <q>Lectures on the Theory of Descent,</q> and in
reality only assumes it, concerning himself with the Darwinian theory
in the strict sense. The English translation is more correctly
entitled <q>The Evolution Theory.</q></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Theory of Descent.</head>

<p>
Again and again we hear and read, even in scientific
circles and journals, that Darwinism breaks down at
many points, that it is insufficient, and even that it
has quite collapsed. Even the assurances of its most convinced
champions are rather forced, and are somewhat
suggestive of bills payable in the future.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
Wagner, <q>Zur gegenwärtigen Lage des Darwinismus.</q>
<q>Die Umschau,</q> January, 1900.</note> But here
again it is obvious that we must distinguish clearly
between the Theory of Descent and Darwinism. Of the
Theory of Descent it is by no means true that it has
<q>broken down.</q> With a slight exaggeration, but on
the whole with justice, Weismann has asserted that the
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
Theory of Descent is to-day a <q>generally accepted
truth.</q> Even Weismann's most pronounced opponents,
such as Eimer, Wolff, Reinke, and others, are at one
with him in this, that there has been evolution in some
form; that there has been a progressive transformation
of species; that there is real (not merely ideal) relationship
or affiliation connecting our modern forms of life,
up to and including man, with the lower and lowest
forms of bygone æons.
</p>

<p>
The evidences are the same as those adduced by
Darwin and before his time, but they have been multiplied
and more sharply defined:&mdash;namely, that the forms
of life can be arranged in an ascending scale of evolution,
both in their morphological and their physiological
aspects, both as regards the general type and the
differentiation of individual organs and particular characters,
bodily and mental. All the rubrics used by
Darwin in this connection, from comparative anatomy,
from the palæontological record itself, and so on,
have been filled out with ever-increasing detail. Palæontology,
in particular, is continually furnishing new
illustrations of descent and new evidence of its probability,
more telling perhaps in respect of general features
and particular groups than in regard to the historical
process in detail. For certain species and genera
palæontology discloses the primitive forms, discovers
<q>synthetic types</q> which were the starting-point for
diverging branches of evolution, bridges over or narrows
the yawning gulfs in evolution by the discovery of
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
<q>intermediate forms</q>; and, in the case of certain
species, furnishes complete genealogical trees. The
same holds true of the facts of comparative anatomy,
embryology, and so on. In all detailed investigations
into an animal type, in the study of the structure,
functions, or the instincts of an ant, or of a whale or of
a tape-worm, the standpoint of the theory of descent
is assumed, and it proves a useful clue for further
investigation.
</p>

<p>
In regard to man&mdash;so we are assured&mdash;the theory
finds confirmation through the discovery of the Neanderthal,
Spy, Schipka, La Naulette skulls and bones&mdash;the
remains of a prehistoric human race, with <q>pithecoid</q>
(ape-like) characters. And the theory reaches its
climax in Dubois' discovery of the remains of <q>Pithecanthropus,</q>
the upright ape-man, in Java, 1891-92,
the long sought-for Missing Link between animals and
man;<note place='foot'>Eugen Dubois (Military
Surgeon of the Dutch Army), <q>Pithecanthropus
erectus, a man-like transition-form from Java.</q> Batavia.
1904.</note> and in the still more recent proofs of <q>affinity
of blood</q> between man and ape, furnished by experiments
in transfusion. Friedenthal has revived the
older experiments of transfusing the blood of one
animal into another, the blood of an animal of one
species into that of another, of related species into related
species, more remote into more remote, and finally
even from animals into man. The further apart the two
species are, the more different are the physiological
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
characters of the blood, and the more difficult does a
mingling of the two become. Blood of a too distantly
related form does not unite with that of the animal
into which it is transfused, but the red corpuscles of
the former are destroyed by the serum of the latter,
break up and are eliminated. In nearly related species
or races, however, the two kinds of blood unite, as in
the case of horse and ass, or of hare and rabbit. Human
blood serum behaves in a hostile fashion to the blood
of eel, pigeon, horse, dog, cat, and even to that of
Lemuroids, or that of the more remotely related <q>non-anthropoid</q>
monkey; human blood transfused from
a negro into a white unites readily, as does also that
of orang-utan transfused into a gibbon. But human
blood also unites without any breaking-up or disturbance
with the blood of a chimpanzee; from which the
inference is that man is not to be placed in a separate
sub-order beside the other sub-orders of the Primates,
the platyrrhine and catarrhine monkeys, not even in
a distinct sub order beside the catarrhines; but is to
be included with them in one zoological sub-order.
This classification was previously suggested by Selenka
on other grounds, namely, because of the points in
common in the embryonic development of the catarrhine
monkeys and of man, and their common distinctiveness
as contrasted with the platyrrhines.<note place='foot'>H. Friedenthal.
<q>Ueber einen experimentellen Nachweis von
Blutsverwandtschaft.</q> Archiv. f. Anatomie und Physiologie, 1900,
p. 404.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Haeckel's Evolutionist Position.</head>

<p>
The average type of the Theory of Descent of the
older or orthodox school, which still lingers in the
background with its Darwinism unshaken, is that set
forth by Haeckel, scientifically in his <q>Generelle Morphologie
der Organismen</q> (1866), and <q>Systematische
Phylogenie</q> (1896), and popularly in his <q>Natural
History of Creation</q> and <q>Riddles of the Universe,</q>
with their many editions. We may assume that it is well
known, and need only briefly recall its chief characteristics.
The <q>inestimable value,</q> the <q>incomparable
significance,</q> the <q>immeasurable importance</q> of the
Theory of Descent lies, according to Haeckel, in the fact
that by means of it we can explain the origin of the
forms of life <q>in a mechanical manner.</q> The theory,
especially in regard to the descent of man from the
apes, is to him not a working hypothesis or tentative
mode of representation; it is a result comparable to
Newton's law of gravitation or the Kant-Laplace cosmogony.
It is <q>a certain historical fact.</q> The proofs
of it are those already mentioned.
</p>

<p>
What is especially Haeckelian is the <q>fundamental
biogenetic law,</q> <q>ontogeny resembles phylogeny,</q> that
is to say, in development, especially in embryonic
development, the individual recapitulates the history
of the race. Through <q>palingenesis,</q> man, for instance,
recapitulates his ancestral stages (protist, gastræad,
vermine, piscine, and simian). This recapitulation is condensed,
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
disarranged, or obscured in detail by <q>cenogenesis</q>
or <q>cænogenesis.</q> The groups and types of
organisms exhibit the closest genetic solidarity. The
genealogical tree of man in particular runs directly
through a whole series. From the realm of the protists
it leads to that of the gastræadæ (nowadays represented
by the Cœlentera), thence into the domain of the
worms, touches the hypothetical <q>primitive chordates</q>
(for the necessary existence of which <q>certain proofs</q>
can be given), the class of tunicates, ascends through
the fishes, amphibians and reptiles to forms parallel to
the modern monotremes, then directly through the
marsupials to the placentals, through lemuroids and
baboons to the anthropoid apes, from them to the
<q>famous Pithecanthropus</q> discovered in Java, out of
which <hi rend='italic'>homo sapiens</hi> arose. (The easy transition from
one group of forms to another is to be noted. For it
is against this point that most of the opposition has
been directed, whether from <q>grumbling</q> critics, or
thoroughgoing opponents of the Theory of Descent.)
</p>

<p>
Haeckel's facile method of constructing genealogical
trees, which ignores difficulties and discrepant facts,
has met with much criticism and ridicule even among
Darwinians. The <q>orator of Berlin,</q> Du Bois-Reymond,
declared that if he must read romances he would prefer
to read them in some other form than that of genealogical
trees. But they have at least the merit that
they give a vivid impression of what is most plausible
and attractive in the idea of descent, and moreover
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
they have helped towards orientation in the discussion.
Nor can we ignore the very marked taxonomic and
architectonic talent which their construction displays.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Weismann's Evolutionist Position.</head>

<p>
The most characteristic representative, however, of
the modern school of unified and purified Darwinism is
not Haeckel, but the Freiburg zoologist, Weismann.
Through a long series of writings he has carried on the
conflict against heterodox, and especially Lamarckian
theories of evolution, and has developed his theories of
heredity and the causes of variation, of the non-transmissibility
of acquired characters, and the all-sufficiency
of natural selection. In his latest great work, in two
volumes, <q>Lectures on the Theory of Descent,</q><note place='foot'>Jena,
1904. Trans. <q>The Evolution Theory,</q> Arnold. London
1904.</note> he
has definitely summed up and systematised his views.
These will interest us when we come to inquire into
the problem of the factors operative in evolution.
For the moment we are only concerned with his attitude
to the Theory of Descent as such. It is precisely the
same as Haeckel's, although he is opposed to Haeckel
in regard to the strictly Darwinian standpoint. The
Theory of Descent has conquered, and it may be said
with assurance, for ever. That is the firm conviction
on which the whole work is based, and it is really
rather treated as a self-evident axiom than as a statement
to be proved. Weismann takes little trouble to
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
prove it. All the well-known, usually very clear proofs
from palæontology, comparative anatomy, &amp;c., which
we are accustomed to meet with in evolutionist books are
wanting here, the genealogical trees of the Equidæ, with
the gradually diminishing number of toes and the varying
teeth, of <hi rend='italic'>Planorbis multiformis</hi>, of the ammonites,
the graduated series of stages exhibited by individual
organs, for instance, from the ganglion merely sensitive
to light up to the intricate eye, or from the rayed skeleton
of the paired fins in fishes up to the five-fingered hands
and feet of the higher vertebrates, &amp;c. These are only
briefly touched upon in the terse <q>Introduction,</q> and the
whole of the comprehensive work is then directed to
showing what factors can have been operative, and
to proving that they must have been <q>Darwinian</q>
(selection in the struggle for existence), and not
Lamarckian or any other. This is shown in regard
to the coloration of animals, the phenomena of
mimicry, the protective arrangements of plants, the
development of instinct in animals, and the origin of
flowers.
</p>

<p>
In reality Weismann only adduces <emph>one</emph> strict proof,
and even that is only laying special stress on what is
well known in comparative embryology; namely, the
possibility of <q>predicting</q> on the basis of the theory
of descent, as Leverrier <q>predicted</q> Neptune. For instance,
in the lower vertebrates from amphibians
upwards there is an <hi rend='italic'>os centrale</hi> in the skeleton of wrist,
but there is none in man. Now if man be descended
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
from lower vertebrates, and if the fundamental biogenetic
law be true (that every form of life recapitulates
in its own development, especially in its embryonic
development, the evolution of its race, though with
abbreviations and condensations), it may be predicted
that the <hi rend='italic'>os centrale</hi> is to be found in the early embryonic
stages of man. And Rosenberg found it. In the
same way the <q>gill-clefts</q> of the fish-like ancestors
have long since been discovered in the embryo of the
higher vertebrates and of man. Weismann himself
<q>predicted</q> that the markings of the youngest stage
of the caterpillars of the Sphingidæ (hawk-moths)
would be found to be not oblique but longitudinal
stripes, and ten years later a fortunate observation
verified the prediction. Because of the abundance of
evidential facts Weismann does not go into any detailed
proof of evolution. <q>One can hardly take up any
work, large or small, on the finer or more general
structural relations, or on the development of any
animal, without finding in it proofs for the evolution
theory.</q>
</p>

<p>
But assured as the doctrine of descent appears,<note place='foot'>A
defence of this very confident Darwinian point of view, for
the benefit of non-scientific readers, will be found in the recent <q>Gemeinverständlichen
darwinistischen Vorträgen und Abhandlungen,</q>
by Plate, Simroth, Schmidt, and others. See also Ziegler's <q>Ueber
den derzcitigen Stand der Descendenzlehre in der Zoologie.</q></note> and
certain as it is that it has not only maintained its hold
since Darwin's day, but has strengthened it and has
gained adherents, this foundation of Darwinism is
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
nevertheless not the unanimous and inevitable conclusion
of all scientific men in the sense and to the extent
that the utterances of Weismann and others would lead
us to suppose. Apart from all apologetic attempts
either in religious, ethical, or æsthetic interests, apart,
too, from the superior standpoint of the philosophers,
who have not, so to speak, taken the theory very seriously,
but regard it as a provisional theory, as a more or less
necessary and useful method of grouping our ideas in
regard to the organic world, there are even among
the biologists themselves some who, indifferent towards
religious or philosophical or naturalistic dogma, hold
strictly to fact, and renounce with nonchalance any
pretensions at completeness of knowledge if the data
do not admit of it, and on these grounds hold themselves
aloof from evolutionist generalisation. From
among these come the counsels of <q>caution,</q> admissions
that the theory is a scientific hypothesis and a guide to
research, but not knowledge, and confessions that the
Theory of Descent as a whole is verifiable rather as a
general impression than in detail.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Virchow's Position.</head>

<p>
Warnings of this kind have come occasionally from
Du Bois-Reymond, but the true type of this group, and
its mode of thought, is Virchow. It will repay us and
suffice us to make acquaintance with it through him.
His opposition to Darwinism and the theory of
descent was directed at its most salient point: the
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
descent of man from the apes. In lectures and
treatises, at zoological and anthropological congresses,
especially at the meetings of his own Anthropological-Ethnological
Society in Berlin, from his <q>Vorträge über
Menschen-und Affen-Schädel</q> (Lectures on the Skulls
of Man and Apes, 1869), to the disputes over Dubois'
<hi rend='italic'>Pithecanthropus erectus</hi> in the middle of the nineties, he
threw the whole weight of his immense learning&mdash;ethnological
and anthropological, osteological, and
above all <q>craniological</q>&mdash;into the scale against the
Theory of Descent and its supporters. Virchow has
therefore been reckoned often enough among the anti-Darwinians,
and has been quoted by apologists and
others as against Darwinism, and he has given reason
for this, since he has often taken the field against <q>the
Darwinists</q> or has scoffed at their <q>longing for a
pro-anthropos.</q><note place='foot'><q>Rassenbildung und Erblichkeit,</q> Festschrift
für Bastian, p. 9.</note> Sometimes even it has been suggested
that he was actuated by religious motives, as when
he occasionally championed not only freedom for
science, but, incidentally, the right of existence for <q>the
churches,</q> leaving, for instance, in his theory of psychical
life, gaps in knowledge which faith might occupy in
moderation and modesty. But this last proves nothing.
With Virchow's altogether unemotional nature it is
unlikely that religious or spiritual motives had any rôle
in the establishment of his convictions, and in Haeckel's
naïve blustering at religion, there is, so to speak, more
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
religion than in the cold-blooded connivance with which
Virchow leaves a few openings in otherwise frozen
ponds for the ducks of faith to swim in! And he has
nothing of the pathos of Du Bois-Reymond's <q>ignorabimus.</q>
He is the neutral, prosaic scientist, who will let nothing <q>tempt
him to a transcendental consideration,</q><note place='foot'><q>Rassenbildung
und Erblichkeit,</q> Festschrift für Bastian, p. 6.</note>
either theological or naturalistic, who holds
tenaciously to matters of fact, who, without absolutely
rejecting a general theory, will not concern himself
about it, except to point out every difficulty in the way
of it; in short, he is the representative of a mood that
is the ideal of every investigator and the despair of
every theoriser.
</p>

<p>
His lecture of 1869 already indicates his subsequent
attitude. <q>Considered logically and speculatively</q>
the Theory of Descent seems to him <q>excellent,</q><note place='foot'><q>Sammlung
gemeinverständl. Vorträge, hrsg. v. Virchow und
Holtzendorf,</q> Heft 96. <q>Menschen und Affenschädel,</q> Berlin,
1870.</note> indeed
a logical moral(!) hypothesis, but unproved in itself, and
erroneous in many of its particular propositions. As far
back as 1858, before the publication of Darwin's great
work, he stated at the Naturalists' Congress in Carlsruhe,
that the origin of one species out of another
appeared to him a necessary scientific inference, but&mdash;&mdash;And
throughout the whole lecture he alternates between
favourable recognition of the theory in general, and
emphasis of the difficulties which confront it in detail.
The skull, which, according to Goethe's theory, has
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
evolved from three modified vertebræ, is fundamentally
different in man and monkeys, both in regard to its
externals, crests, ridges and shape, and especially in
regard to the nature of the cavity which it forms for
the brain. Specifically distinctive differences in the
development and structure of the rest of the body must
also be taken into account. The so-called ape-like
structures in the skull and the rest of the body, which
occasionally occur in man (idiots, microcephaloids, &amp;c.)
cannot be regarded as atavisms and therefore as proofs
of the Theory of Descent; they are of a pathological
nature, entirely facts <hi rend='italic'>sui generis</hi>, and <q>not to be placed
in a series with the normal results of evolution.</q> A
man modified by disease <q>is still thoroughly a man,
not a monkey.</q>
</p>

<p>
Virchow continued to maintain this attitude and
persisted in this kind of argument. He energetically
rejected all attempts to find <q>pithecoid</q> characters in
the prehistoric remains of man. He declared the
narrow and less arched forehead, the elliptical form, and
the unusually large frontal cavities of the <q>Neanderthal
skull</q> found in the Wupperthal in 1856, to be simply
pathological features, which occur as such in certain
examples of <hi rend='italic'>homo sapiens</hi>.<note place='foot'><q>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie,</q> 1882, p. 276.</note> He explained the abnormal
appearance of the jaw from the Moravian cave of
Schipka as a result of the retention of teeth,<note place='foot'><q>Verh. Berlin
anthropolog. Gesellschaft iv.</q> (1872), p. 132. It
does, however, appear strange to the lay mind that it should have
been only the pathological subjects of prehistoric times that had
their remains preserved for our modern study.</note> accompanied
by directly <q>antipithecoid</q> characters.
</p>

<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>

<p>
The proceedings at the meetings of the Ethnological
Society in 1895, at which Dubois was present, had an
almost dramatic character.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
<q>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie,</q> 1895, pp. 78, 735.</note> In the diverse opinions
of Dubois, Virchow, Nehring, Kollmann, Krause and
others, we have almost an epitome of the present state
of the Darwinian question. Virchow doubted whether
the parts put together by Dubois (the head of a femur,
two molar teeth, and the top of a skull) belonged to
the same individual at all, disputed the calculations as
to the large capacity of the skull, placed against
Dubois' very striking and clever drawing of the curves
of the skull-outline, which illustrated, with the help of
the Pithecanthropus, the gradual transition from the
skull of a monkey to that of man, his own drawing,
according to which the Pithecanthropus curve simply
coincides with that of a gibbon (<hi rend='italic'>Hylobates</hi>), and
asserted that the remains discovered were those of a
species of gibbon, refusing even to admit that they
represented a new genus of monkeys. He held fast to
his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ceterum censeo</foreign>:
<q>As yet no diluvial discovery has
been made which can be referred to a man of a pithecoid
type.</q> Indeed, his polemic or <q>caution</q> in regard
to the Theory of Descent went even further. He
not only refused to admit the proof of the descent of
man from monkey, he would not even allow that the descent of one race from
another has been demonstrated.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
<q>Rassenbildung und Erblichkeit.</q> Festschrift für Bastian,
1895.</note>
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
In spite of all the plausible hypotheses it
remains <q>so far only a <foreign rend='italic'>pium desiderium</foreign>.</q> The race
obstinately maintains its specific distinctness, and resists
variation, or gradual transformation into another. The
negro remains a negro in America, and the European
colonist of Australia remains a European.
</p>

<p>
Yet all Virchow's opposition may be summed
up in the characteristic words, which might almost
be called his motto, <q>I warn you of the need for
caution,</q> and it is not a seriously-meant rejection
of the Theory of Descent. In reality he holds the
evolution-idea as an axiom, and in the last-named
treatise he shows distinctly how he conceives of the
process. He starts with variation (presumably <q>kaleidoscopic</q>),
which comes about as a <q>pathological</q>
phenomenon, that is to say, not spontaneously, but as
the result of environmental stimulus, as the organism's
reaction to climatic and other conditions of life. The
result is an alteration of previous characteristics, and a
new stable race is established by an <q>acquired
anomaly.</q><note place='foot'>See also <q>Descendenz
und Pathologie.</q> Arch. f. path. Anat.
a. Physiol., 1886; <q>Transformation und Abstammung.</q> Berliner
Klin. Wochenschrift, 1893.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Other Instances of Dissatisfaction with the
Theory of Descent.</head>

<p>
What was with Virchow only a suggestion of the
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
need for caution, or controversial matter to be subsequently
allowed for or contradicted, had more serious
consequences to others, and led to still greater hesitancy
as regards evolutionist generalisations and speculations,
and sometimes to sharp antagonism to them.
</p>

<p>
One of the best known of the earlier examples of this
mood is Kerner von Marilaun's large and beautiful work
on <q>Plant Life.</q><note place='foot'>First edition,
Leipzig, 1887. A second edition and an English
translation have since been published. See especially the discussion
of the origin and history of species in the second volume.</note>
He does, indeed, admit that our
species are variations of antecedent forms, but only in
a very limited sense. Within the stocks or grades of
organisation which have always existed, variations have
come about, through <q>hybridisation,</q> through the
crossing of similar, but relatively different forms; these
variations alter the configuration and appearance in
detail, but neither affect the general character nor
cause any transition from <q>lower</q> to <q>higher.</q>
</p>

<p>
Kerner disposes of the chief argument in favour of
the theory of descent, the homology of individual
organs, by explaining that the homology is due to the
similarity of function in the different organisms.
A similar argument is used in regard to <q>ontogeny
recapitulating phylogeny.</q> Palæontology does not
disclose in the plant-world any <q>synthetic types,</q>
which might have been the common primitive stock
from which many now divergent branches have sprung,
nor does it disclose any <q>transition links</q> really intermediate,
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
for instance, between cryptogams and gymnosperms,
or between gymnosperms and angiosperms.
That the higher races are apparently absent from the
earlier strata is not a proof that they have never
existed. The peat-bog flora must have involved the
existence of a large companion-flora, without which the
peat could not have been formed, but all trace of
this is absent in the still persistent vestiges of these
times.<note place='foot'>See English translation of Kerner's
Plant Life.</note> Life, with energy and matter, has existed as
a phenomenon of the universe from all eternity, and
thus its chief forms and manifestations have not
<q>arisen,</q> but have always been. If facts such as these
contradict the Kant-Laplace theory of the universe,
then the latter must be corrected in the light of them,
not conversely. The extreme isolation of Kerner and
his theory is probably due especially to this corollary of
his views.
</p>

<p>
Among the most recent examples of antagonism to
the Evolution-Theory, the most interesting is a book
by Fleischmann, professor of zoology in Erlangen,
published in 1901, and entitled, <q>The Theory of
Descent.</q> It consists of <q>popular lectures on the rise
and decline of a scientific hypothesis</q> (namely, the
Theory of Descent), and it is a complete recantation by
a quondam Darwinian of the doctrine of his school,
even of its fundamental proposition, the concept of
evolution itself. For Fleischmann is not guilty, like
Weismann, of the inaccuracy of using <q>Theory of
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
Descent</q> as equivalent to Darwinism; he is absolutely
indifferent to the theory of natural selection. His
book keeps strictly to matters of fact, and rejects as
speculation everything in the least beyond these; it does
not express even an opinion on the question of the
origin of species, but merely criticises and analyses.
</p>

<p>
It does not bring forward any new and overwhelming
arguments in refutation of the Theory of Descent, but
strongly emphasises difficulties that have always beset
it, and discusses these in detail. The old dispute which
interested Goethe, Geoffroy St. Hilaire, and Cuvier, as
to the unity or the fundamental heterogeneity of the
<q>architectural plan</q> in nature is revived. Modern
zoology recognises not merely the four types of Cuvier,
but seventeen different styles, <q>phyla,</q> or groups of
forms, to derive one of which from another is hopeless.
And what is true of the whole is true also of the subdivisions
within each phylum; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, within the vertebrate
phylum with its fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds
and mammals. No bridge leads from one to the other.
This is proved particularly by the very instance which
is the favourite illustration in support of the Theory of
Descent&mdash;the fin of fishes and its relation to the five-fingered
hand of vertebrates. The so-called transition
forms (Archæopteryx, monotremes, &amp;c.) are discredited.
So with the <q>stalking-horse</q> of evolutionists&mdash;the
genealogical tree of the Equidæ, which is said to be
traceable palæontologically right back, without a
break, from the one-toed horses of the present day to
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
the normal five-toed ancestry; and so with another
favourite instance of evolution, the history of the pond-snails
(<foreign rend='italic'>Planorbis multiformis</foreign>), the numerous varieties
of which occur with transitions between them in actual
contiguity in the Steinheim beds, and thus seem to afford
an obvious example of the transformation of species.
Against these cases, and against using the palæontological
archives as a basis for the construction of
genealogical trees in general, the weighty and apparently
decisive objection is urged, that nowhere are the
soft parts of the earlier forms of life preserved, and that
it is impossible to establish relationships with any
certainty on the basis of hard parts only, such as bones,
teeth and shells. Even Haeckel admits that snails of
very different bodily structure may form very similar
and even hardly distinguishable shells.
</p>

<p>
Fleischmann further asserts that Haeckel's <q>fundamental
biogenetic law</q> has utterly collapsed. <q>Recapitulation</q>
does not occur. Selenka's figures of ovum-segmentation
show that there are specific differences in
the individual groups. The origin and development
of the blastoderm or germinal disc has nothing to do
with recapitulation of the phylogeny. It is not the
case that the embryos of higher vertebrates are indistinguishable
from one another. Even the egg-cell has
a specific character, and is totally different from any
unicellular organism at the Protistan level. The
much-cited <q>gill-clefts</q> of higher vertebrates in the
embryonic stage are not persistent reminiscences of
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
earlier lower stages; they are rudiments or primordia
shared by all vertebrates, and developing differently at
the different levels; (thus in fishes they become breathing
organs, and in the higher vertebrates they become
in part associated with the organs of hearing, or in
part disappear again).
</p>

<p>
Though Fleischmann's vigorous protest against over-hastiness
in construction and over-confidence on the
part of the adherents of the doctrine of descent is very
interesting, and may often be justified in detail, it is
difficult to resist the impression that the wheat has
been rejected with the chaff.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
a criticism of the book from the Darwinian point of view by
Plate in Biologisches Centralblatt, 1901.</note>
</p>

<p>
Even a layman may raise the following objections:
Admitting that the great groups of forms cannot be
traced back to one another, the palæontological record
still proves, though it may be only in general outline,
that within each phylum there has been a gradual succession
and ascent of forms. How is the origin of
what is new to be accounted for? Without doing
violence to our thinking, without a sort of intellectual
autonomy, we cannot rest content with the mere fact that
new elements occur. So, in spite of all <q>difficulties,</q>
the assumption of <emph>an actual descent</emph> quietly forces
itself upon us as the only satisfactory clue. And the
fact, which Fleischmann does not discuss, that even at
present we may observe the establishment of what are
at least new breeds, impels us to accept an analogous
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
origin of new species. Even if the biogenetic law
really <q>finds its chief confirmation in its exceptions,</q>
even if we cannot speak of a strict recapitulation of
earlier stages of evolution, there are indisputable facts
which are most readily interpreted as reminiscences, as
due to affiliation (ideal or hereditary), with ancestral
forms. (Note, for instance, Weismann's <q>prediction,</q>
&amp;c.<note place='foot'>That this points only to the fact of evolution, and not
necessarily to actual descent, will be seen later on.</note>)
Even if Archæopteryx and other intermediate
forms cannot be regarded as connecting links in the
strict sense, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, as being stages in the actual pedigree,
yet the occurrence of reptilian and avian peculiarities
side by side in one organism, goes far to prove the close
relationship of the two classes.
</p>

<p>
Fleischmann's book strengthens the impression gained
elsewhere, that a general survey of the domain of
life as a whole gives force and convincingness to the
Theory of Descent, while a study of details often
results in breaking the threads and bringing the difficulties
into prominence. But the same holds true of
many other theoretical constructions, and yet we do not
seriously doubt their validity. (Take, for instance, the
Kant-Laplace theory, and theories of ethnology, of the
history of religion, of the history of language, and so
on.) And it is quite commonly to be observed that
those who have an expert and specialist knowledge, who
are aware of the refractoriness of detailed facts, often
take up a sceptical attitude towards every comprehensive
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
theory, though the ultimate use of detailed investigation
is to make the construction of general theories
possible. Fleischmann does exactly what, say, an
anthropologist would do if, under the impression of the
constancy and distinctiveness of the human races, which
would become stronger the more deeply he penetrated,
he should resignedly renounce all possibility of affiliating
them, and should rest content with the facts as he
found them. Similarly, those who are most intimately
acquainted with the races of domesticated animals
often resist most strenuously all attempts, although
these seem to others a matter of course, to derive our
<q>tame</q> forms from <q>wild</q> species living in freedom.
</p>

<p>
But to return. Even where the Theory of Descent
is recognised, whether fully or only half-heartedly, the
recognition does not always mean the same thing.
Even the adherents of the general, but in itself quite
vague view that a transformation from lower forms to
higher, and from similar to different forms, has taken
place, may present so many points of disagreement,
and may even stand in such antagonism to one
another, that onlookers are apt to receive the impression
that they occupy quite different standpoints, and are no
longer at one even in the fundamentals of their
hypotheses.
</p>

<p>
The most diverse questions and answers crop up;
whether evolution has been brought about <q>monophyletically</q>
or <q>polyphyletically,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, through one or
many genealogical trees; whether it has taken place in
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
a continuous easy transition from one type to another,
or by leaps and bounds; whether through a gradual
transformation of all organs, each varying individually,
or through correlated <q>kaleidoscopic</q> variations of
many kinds throughout the whole system; whether it
is essentially asymptotic, or whether organisms pass
from <q>labile</q> phases of vital equilibrium by various
halting-places to stable states, which are definitive, and
are, so to speak, the blind alleys and terminal points of
evolutionary possibilities, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the extinct gigantic
saurians, and perhaps also man. And to these problems
must be added the various answers to the question,
What precedes, or may have preceded, the earliest
stages of life of which we know? Whence came the first
cell? Whence the first living protoplasm? and How
did the living arise from the inorganic? These deeper
questions will occupy us in our chapter on the theory
of life. Some of the former, in certain of their aspects,
will be considered in the sixth chapter, which deals
with factors in evolution.
</p>

<p>
The Theory of Descent itself and the differences that
obtain even among its adherents can best be studied by
considering for a little the works of Reinke and of
Hamann.
</p>

<p>
Reinke, Professor of Botany in Kiel, has set forth his
views in his book, <q>Die Welt als Tat,</q><note place='foot'>First
edition, 1899; now in a second edition.</note> and more
recently in his <q>Einleitung in die theoretische
Biologie</q> (1901). Both books are addressed to a wide
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
circle of readers. Reinke and Hamann both revive
some of the arguments and opinions set forth in the
early days of Darwinism by Wigand,<note place='foot'><q>Genealogie
der Urzellen als Lösung des Descendenzproblems</q>
(1872), and <q>Der Darwinismus und die Naturforschung Newtons
und Cuviers</q> (1874-1877).</note> an author whose
works are gradually gaining increased appreciation.
</p>

<p>
It is Reinke's <q>unalterable conviction</q> that organisms
have evolved, and that they have done so after the
manner of fan-shaped genealogical trees. The Theory
of Descent is to him an axiom of modern biology, though
as a matter of fact the circumstantial evidence in favour
of it is extremely fragmentary. The main arguments in
favour of it appear to him to be the general ones; the
homologies and analogies revealed by comparative
morphology and physiology, the ascending series in
the palæontological record, vestigial organs, parasitic
degeneration, the origin of those vital associations which
we call consortism and symbiosis. These he illustrates
mainly by examples from his own special domain and
personal observation.
</p>

<p>
The simplest unicellular forms of life are to be
thought of as at the beginning of evolution; and, since
mechanical causes cannot explain their ascent, it must be
assumed that they have an inherent <q>phylogenetic potential
of development,</q> which, working epigenetically,
results in ascending evolution. He leaves us to choose
between monophyletic and polyphyletic evolution, but
himself inclines towards the latter, associating with it a
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
rehabilitation of Wigand's theory of the primitive cells.
If, in the beginning, primitive forms of life arose (probably
as unicellulars) from the not-living, it is not
obvious why we need think of only one so arising, and,
if many did so, why they should not have inherent
differences which would at once result in typically
different evolutionary series and groups of forms. But
evolution does not go on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad libitum</foreign>
or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>, for
the capacity for differentiation and transformation
gradually diminishes. The organisation passes from a
labile state of equilibrium to an increasingly stable state,
and at many points it may reach a terminus where it
comes to a standstill. Man, the dog, the horse, the
cereals, and fruit trees appear to Reinke to have reached
their goal. The preliminary stages he calls <q>Phylembryos,</q>
because they bear to the possible outcome of
their evolution the same relation that the embryo does
to the perfect individual. Thus, <hi rend='italic'>Phenacodus</hi> may be
regarded as the Phylembryo of the modern horse. It is
quite conceivable that each of our modern species may
have had an independent series of Phylembryos reaching
back to the primitive cells. But the palæontological
record, and especially its synthetic types, lead Reinke
rather to assume that instead of innumerable series,
there have been branching genealogical trees, not one,
however, but several.
</p>

<p>
These views, together or separately, which are characterised
chiefly by the catch-words <q>polyphyletic
descent,</q> <q>labile and stable equilibrium,</q> and so on, crop
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
up together or separately in the writings of various
evolutionists belonging to the opposition wing. They
are usually associated with a denial of the theory of
natural selection, and with theories of <q>Orthogenesis,</q>
<q>Heterogenesis,</q> and <q>Epigenesis.</q>
</p>

<p>
We shall discuss them later when we are considering
the factors in evolution. But we must first take notice
of a work in which the theories opposed to Darwinian
orthodoxy have been most decisively and aggressively
set forth. As far back as 1892 O. Hamann, then a
lecturer on zoology in Göttingen, gathered these
together and brought them into the field, against
Haeckel in particular, in his book <q>Entwicklungslehre
und Darwinismus.</q><note place='foot'><q>Eine kritische Darstellung
der modernen Entwicklungslehre,</q>
Jena, 1892.</note>
</p>

<p>
Hamann's main theme is that Darwinism overlooks
the fact that <q>there cannot have been an origin of
higher types from types already finished.</q> For this
<q>unfortunate and unsupported assumption</q> there are
no proofs in embryology, palæontology, or anatomy.
He adopts and expands the arguments and anti-Haeckelian
deliverances of His in embryology, of Snell and
Heer in palæontology, of Kölliker and von Baer in
their special interpretation of evolution, of Snell particularly
as regards the descent of man. It is impossible
to derive Metazoa from Protozoa in their present
finished state of evolution; even the Amoeba is so
exactly adapted in organisation and functional activity
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
to the conditions of its existence that it is a <q>finished</q>
type. It is only by a stretch of fancy that fishes can
be derived from worms, or higher vertebrates from
fishes. One of his favourite arguments&mdash;and it is a
weighty one, though neglected by the orthodox Darwinians&mdash;is
that living substance is capable, under
similar stimuli, of developing spontaneously and afresh,
at quite different points and in different groups, similar
organs, such as spots sensitive to light, accumulations
of pigment, eye-spots, lenses, complete eyes, and
similarly with the notochord, the excretory organs, and
the like. Therefore homology of organs is no proof of
their hereditary affiliation.<note place='foot'>Compare Darwin's
derivation of fishes from Tunicata because of
the notochord which occurs in the tunicate larvæ.</note> They rather illustrate
<q>iterative evolution.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another favourite argument is the fact of <q>Pædogenesis.</q>
Certain animals, such as <hi rend='italic'>Amphioxus lanceolatus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Peripatus</hi>, and certain Medusæ, are very frequently
brought forward as examples of persistent
primitive stages and <q>transitional connecting links.</q>
But considered from the point of view of Pædogenesis,
they all assume quite a different aspect, and seem rather
to represent very highly evolved species, and to be,
not primitive forms, but conservative and regressive
forms. Pædogenesis is the phenomenon exhibited
by a number of species, which may stop short at
one of the stages of their embryonic or larval
development, become sexually mature, and produce
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
offspring without having attained their own fully
developed form.
</p>

<p>
Another argument is the old, suggestive, and really
important one urged by Kölliker, that <q>inorganic
nature shows a natural system among minerals (crystals)
just as much as animals and plants do, yet in the former
there can be no question of any genetic connection in
the production of forms.</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet another argument is found in the occurrence of
<q>inversions</q> and anomalies in the palæontological succession
of forms, which to some extent upsets the Darwinian-Haeckelian
genealogical trees. (Thus there are
forms in the Cambrian whose alleged ancestors do not
appear till the Silurian. Foraminifera and other
Protozoa do not appear till the Silurian.)
</p>

<p>
From embryology in particular, as elsewhere in
general, we read the <q>fundamental biogenetic law,</q> that
evolution is from the general to the special, from the
imperfect to the more perfect, from what is still indefinite
and exuberant to the well-defined and precise, but never
from the special to the special. According to Hamann's
hypothesis we must think of evolution as going on, so
to speak, not about the top but about the bottom. The
phyla or groups of forms are great trunks bearing many
branches and twigs, but not giving rise to one another.
Still less do the little side branches of one trunk bear
the whole great trunk of another animal or plant
phylum. But they all grow from the same roots among
the primitive forms of life. Unicellulars these must
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
have been, but not like our <q>Protists.</q> They should
be thought of as primitive forms having within themselves
the potentialities of the most diverse and widely
separate evolution-series to which they gave rise, as it
were, along diverging fan-like rays.
</p>

<p>
It would be instructive to follow some naturalist into
his own particular domain, for instance a palæontologist
into the detailed facts of palæontology, or an embryologist
into those of embryology, in order to learn
whether these corroborate the assumptions of the
Theory of Descent or not. It is just in relation to
these detailed facts that criticisms or even denials of
the theory have been most frequent. Koken, otherwise
a convinced supporter of the theory, inquires in his
<q>Vorwelt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>apropos</hi> of the tortoises, what has become
of the genealogical trees that were scattered abroad in
the world as proved facts in the early days of Darwinism.
He asserts, in regard to <hi rend='italic'>Archæopteryx</hi>, the instance
which is always put forward as the intermediate link in
the evolution of birds, that it does not show in any of
its characters a fundamental difference from any of the
birds of to-day, and further, that, through convergent
development under similar influences, similar organs and
structural relations result, iterative arrangements which
come about quite independently of descent. He maintains,
too, that the principle of the struggle for
existence is rather disproved than corroborated by the
palæontological record.
</p>

<p>
In embryology, so competent an authority as
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
O. Hertwig&mdash;himself a former pupil of Haeckel's&mdash;has
reacted from the <q>fundamental biogenetic law.</q> His
theory of the matter is very much that of Hamann
which we have already discussed; development is not
so much a recapitulation of finished ancestral types as
the laying down of foundations after the pattern of
generalised simple forms, not yet specialised; and from
these foundations the special organs rise to different
levels and grades of differentiation according to the
type.<note place='foot'>See Hertwig's <q>Biological Problem of To-day.</q>
London 1896.</note> But we must not lose ourselves in details.
</p>

<p>
Looking back over the whole field once more, we feel
that we are justified in maintaining with some confidence
that the different pronouncements in regard to the
detailed application and particular features of the
Theory of Descent, and the different standpoints that
are occupied even by evolutionists, are at least sufficient
to make it obvious that, even if evolution and
descent have actually taken place, they have not run so
simple and smooth a course as the over-confident would
have us believe; that the Theory of Descent rather
emphasises than clears away the riddles and difficulties
of the case, and that with the mere corroboration of
the theory we shall have gained only something relatively
external, a clue to creation, which does not so
much solve its problems as restate them. The whole
criticism of the <q>right wing,</q> from captious objections
to actual denials, proves this indisputably. And it
seems likely that in the course of time a sharpening of
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
the critical insight and temper will give rise to further
reactions from the academic theory as we have come to
know it.<note place='foot'>The justice of this prophecy has been meanwhile illustrated by
the recent work of H. Friedmann, <q>Die Konvergenz der Organismen,</q>
Berlin, 1904.</note> On the other hand, it may be assumed with
even greater certainty that the general evolutionist
point of view and the great arguments for descent in
some form or other will ultimately be victorious if they
are not so already, and that, sooner or later, we shall
take the Theory of Descent in its most general form as
a matter of course, just as we now do the Kant-Laplace
theory.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Religion And The Theory Of Descent.</head>

<p>
In seeking to define our position in regard to the theory
of descent it is most important that we should recognise
that, when it is looked into closely, the true problem
at issue is not a special zoological one, but is quite
general, and also that it is not a new growth which has
sprung up suddenly and found us unprepared, but that
it is very ancient and has long existed in our midst.
In the whole theory the question of <q>descent</q> is after
all a mere accessory. Even if it fell through and were
seen to be scientifically undemonstrable, <q>evolution in
the realm of life</q> would remain an indisputable fact, and
with it there would arise precisely the same difficulties
for the religious interpretation of the world which are
usually attributed to the Theory of Descent.
</p>

<p>
Evolution or development has been a prominent idea
in the history of thought since the time of Aristotle,
but descent is, so to speak, a modern upstart. According
to long-established modes of thought, to <emph>evolve</emph> means
to pass from δυνάμει to ἰνεργεία εἴναι, from <foreign rend='italic'>potentia</foreign> to
<foreign rend='italic'>actus</foreign>, from the existence of the rudiment as in the seed
to full realisation as in the tree. In the course of its
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
development the organism passes through many successive
phases, which are related to one another like steps,
each rising directly from the one beneath, and preparing
for the one above. Thus all nature, and especially the
realm of life, implies a ladder of <q>evolution.</q> What is
<q>potentially</q> inherent in the lowest form of life has in
the highest, as in man, become actual or <q>realised</q>
through a continuous sequence of phases, successively
more and more evolved. This view in its earlier forms
was very far from implying that each higher step was
literally <q>descended</q> from the one below it, through
the physical and mental transformation of some of its
representatives. As the world, in Aristotle's view for
instance, had existed from all eternity, so also had the
stages and forms of life, each giving rise again to its
like. Indeed, the essential idea was that each higher
step is simply a development, a fuller unfolding of the
lower stage, and finally that man was the complete
realisation of what was potentially inherent in the
lowest of all.
</p>

<p>
This doctrine of evolution was in modern times the
fundamental idea of Leibnitz and Kant, of Goethe,
Schelling and Hegel. It brought unity and connectedness
into the system of nature, united everything by
steps, denied the existence of gaping chasms, and
proclaimed the solidarity of all the forms of life.
But to all this the idea of actual descent was unnecessary.
An actual material variation and transition from
one stage to another seemed to it a wooden and gross
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
expression of the evolution idea, an <q>all too childish
and nebulous hypothesis</q> (Hegel).
</p>

<p>
All the important results of comparative morphology
and physiology, which the modern supporters of the
doctrine of descent so confidently utilise as arguments in
its favour, would have been welcomed by those who held
the original and general evolution idea, as a corroboration
of their own standpoint. And as a matter of fact
they all afford conclusive proofs of <emph>evolution</emph>; but not
one of them, including even the fundamental biogenetic
law and the inoculated chimpanzee, is decisive in regard
to <emph>descent</emph>. This contention is sufficiently important to
claim our attention for a little. Let us take the last
example. Transfusion of blood between two species is
possible, not necessarily because they are descended
from one another or from a common root, but solely
because of their systematic (ideal) relationship, that is to
say because they are sufficiently near to one another
and like one another in their physiological qualities and
functions. If, assuming descent, this homology were
disturbed, and the systematic relationship done away
with, for instance through saltatory evolution, the mere
fact of descent would not bring the two species any
nearer one another. Thus the case proves only
systematic relationship, and only evolution. But as to
the meaning of this systematic relationship, whether it
can be <q>explained</q> by descent, whether it has existed
from all eternity, or how it has arisen, the experiment
does not inform us.
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
The same idea may be illustrated in regard to
Weismann's <q>predicting.</q> This, too, is a proof of
evolution, but not of descent. Exactly as Weismann
predicted the striping of the hawk-moth caterpillars
and the human <hi rend='italic'>os centrale</hi>, Goethe predicted the
formation of the skull from modified vertebræ, and the
premaxillary bone in man. In precisely the same way
he <q>derived</q> the cavities in the human skull from those
of the animal skull. This was quite in keeping with the
manner and style of his Goddess Nature and her
creative transformations, raising the type of her creations
from stage to stage, developing and expanding
each new type from an earlier one, yet keeping the later
analogous to and recapitulative of the earlier, recording
the earlier by means of vestigial and gradually
dwindling parts.
</p>

<p>
But what has all this to do with descent? Even the
<q>biogenetic law</q> itself, especially if it were correct,
would fit admirably into the frame of the pure evolution
idea. For it is quite consistent with that idea to say
that the higher type in the course of its development,
especially in its embryonic stages, passes through stages
representative of the forms of life which are below it
and precede it in the (ideal) genealogical tree. Indeed,
the older doctrine of evolution took account of this
long ago.
</p>

<p>
<q>The same step-ladder which is exhibited by the
whole animal kingdom, the steps of which are the
different races and classes, with at the one extreme the
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
lowliest animals and at the other the highest, is exhibited
also by every higher animal in its development, since
from the moment of its origin until it has reached its
full development it passes through&mdash;both as regards
internal and external organisation&mdash;the essentials of all
the forms which become permanent for a lifetime in the
animals lower than itself. The more perfect the animal
is, the longer is the series of forms it passes through.</q>
</p>

<p>
So J. Fr. Meckel wrote in 1812 in his <q>Handbook of
Pathological Anatomy,</q> <emph>with no thought of descent</emph>.
And the facts which led to the construction of the biogenetic
law were discovered in no small measure by
Agassiz, who was an opponent of the doctrine of
descent.<note place='foot'><p>If we wish to, we can even read the <q>biogenetic law</q>
in Dante. See <q>Purgatory,</q> p. 26, where the embryo attains successively to the
plant, animal and human stages:
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Anima fatta la virtute attiva,</q><lb/>
Qual d'una <hi rend='italic'>pianta</hi>....
</p>
<p>
Come fungo marino ...
</p>
<p>
<q rend='post'>Ma come <hi rend='italic'>d'animal</hi> divenga
<hi rend='italic'>fante</hi>.</q>
</p>
<p>
This is, of course, nothing else than Aristotle's theory of evolution,
done into terzarima, and corrected by St. Thomas.
</p>
<p>
For the latest application of these views, even in relation to the
<q>biogenetic fundamental law,</q> see the finely finished <q>Morpho-genetic
Studies</q> of T. Garbowski (Jena, 1903): <q>The greater part of
what is usually referred to the so-called fundamental biogenetic law
depends on illusion, since all things undeveloped or imperfect must
bear a greater or less resemblance one to another.</q>
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
But the advance from the doctrine of evolution to that
of descent was imperatively prompted by a recognition of
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
the fact that the earth is not from everlasting, and that
the forms of life upon it are likewise not from everlasting,
that, in fact, their several grades appear in an
orderly ascending series. It is therefore simpler and
more plausible to suppose that each higher step has
arisen from the one before it, than to suppose that each
has, so to speak, begun an evolution on its own account.
A series of corroborative arguments might be adduced,
and there is no doubt, as we have said before, that
the transition from the general idea of evolution to
that of descent will be fully accomplished. But it is
plain that the special idea of descent contributes nothing
essentially new on the subject.
</p>

<p>
It is an oft-repeated and self-evident statement, that
it is in reality a matter of entire indifference whether
man arose from the dust of the earth or from living
matter already formed, or, let us say, from one of the
higher vertebrates. The question still would be, how
much or how little of any of them does he still retain,
and how far does he differ from all? Even if there be
really descent, the difference may quite as well be so great&mdash;for
instance, through saltatory development&mdash;that
man, in spite of physical relationship, might belong to
quite a new category far transcending all his ancestors
in his intellectual characteristics, in his emotional and
moral qualities. There is nothing against the assumption,
and there is much to be said in its favour,
that the last step from animal to man was such an immense
one that it brought with it a freedom and
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
richness of psychical life incomparable with anything
that had gone before&mdash;as if life here realised itself for
the first time in very truth, and made everything that
previously had been a mere preliminary play.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, even were there no descent but
separate individual creation, man might, in virtue of
his ideal relationship and evolution, appear nothing
more than a stage relatively separate from those
beneath him in evolution. It was not the doctrine of
descent, it was the doctrine of evolution that first
ranked man in a series with the rest of creation,
and regarded him as the development of what is beneath
him and leads up to him through a gradual
sequence of stages. And his nearness, analogy, or relationship
to what is beneath him is in no way increased
by descent, or rendered a whit more intimate or more
disturbing.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Problema Continui.</head>

<p>
The problem of descent thus shows itself to be one
which has neither isolated character nor special value.
It is an accessory accompaniment of all the questions
and problems which have been raised by, or are associated
with, the doctrine of evolution, which would have
been in our midst without Darwin, which are made
neither easier nor more difficult by zoological knowledge,
and the difficulties of which, if solved, would
solve at the same time any difficulties presented by
descent. The following considerations will serve to
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
make this clear. The most oppressive corollary of the
doctrine of descent is undoubtedly that through it
the human race seems to become lost in the infra-human,
from which it cannot be separated by any
hard and fast boundaries, or absolute lines of demarcation.
But it is easy to see that this problem is in
fact only a part of a larger problem, and that it can
really be solved only through the larger one. Even if
it were possible to do away with this unpleasing inference
as regards the whole human race, so that it could
be in some way separated off securely from the animal
kingdom, the same fatality would remain in regard to
each individual human being. For we have here to face
the problem of individual development by easy transitions,
the ascent from the animal to the human state,
and the question: When is there really soul and spirit,
when man and ego, when freedom and responsibility?
But this is the same problem again, only written with
smaller letters, the general <foreign rend='italic'>problema continui</foreign> in the
domain of life and mind. And the problem is very far-reaching.
In all questions concerning mental health
and disease, abnormalities or cases of arrest at an early
stage of mental development, concerning the greater or
less degree of endowment for intellectual, moral, and
religious life, down to utter absence of capacity, and
this in relation to individuals as well as races and
peoples, and times; and again, concerning the gradual
development of the ethical and religious consciousness
in the long course of history, in its continuity and
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
gradual transition from lower to higher forms: everywhere
we meet this same <foreign rend='italic'>problema continui</foreign>. And our
oppressive difficulty is bound up with this problem,
and can be dispelled only by its solution, for the
gist of the difficulty is nothing else than the <emph>gradualness
of human becoming</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This is not the place for a thoroughgoing discussion
of this <foreign rend='italic'>problema continui</foreign>. We can only call
to mind here that the <q>evolution idea</q> has been the
doctrine of the great philosophical systems from Aristotle
to Leibnitz, and of the great German idealist
philosophers, in whose school the religious interpretation
of the world is at home. We may briefly emphasise
the most important considerations to be kept in
mind in forming a judgment as to gradual development.
</p>

<p>
1. To recognise anything as in course of evolving
does not mean that we understand its <q>becoming.</q>
The true inwardness of <q>becoming</q> is hidden in the
mystery of the transcendental.
</p>

<p>
2. The gradual origin of the highest and most
perfect from the primitive in no way affects the specific
character, the uniqueness and newness of the highest
stage, when compared with its antecedents. For, close
as each step is to the one below, and directly as it
seems to arise out of it, each higher step has a minimum
and differentia of newness (or at least an individual
grouping of the elements of the old), which the
preceding stage does not explain, or for which it is not
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
a sufficient reason, but which emerges as new from the
very heart of things.
</p>

<p>
3. Evolution does not diminish the absolute value of
the perfect stage, which is incomparably greater than
the value of the intermediate stages, it rather accentuates
it. The stages from the half-developed acorn-shoot
are not equivalent in value to the perfect tree; they
are to it as means to an end, and are of minimal value
compared with it.
</p>

<p>
4. All <q>descent</q> and <q>evolution,</q> which, even in
regard to the gradual development of physical organisation
and its secrets, offer not so much an explanation
as a clue, are still less sufficient in regard to the origin
and growth of psychical capacity in general, and in
relation to the awakening and autonomy of the mind
in man, because the psychical and spiritual cannot be
explained in terms of physiological processes, from
either the quantity or the quality of nervous structure.
</p>

<p>
This problem, and the relation of the human spirit
to the animal mind, will fall to be dealt with in
Chapter XI. It is neither the right nor the duty of
the religious conception of the world to inquire into
and choose between the different forms of the idea of
descent which we have met with. If it has made itself
master of the general evolution idea, then descent, even
in its most gradual, continuous, monophyletic form,
affects it not at all. It can then look on, perhaps not
with joy, but certainly without anxiety, at Dubois'
monkey-man and Friedenthal's chimpanzee. On the
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
other hand, it is obvious that a secret bond of sympathy
will always unite it with the right wing of the theory of descent, with the
champions of <q>halmatogenesis,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
The occurrence of saltatory, transilient, or discontinuous
variations or mutations.</note>
heterogenesis,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>,
The emergence of a distinctively new pattern of organisation.</note>
kaleidoscopic readjustment, &amp;c., because
in all these the depth and wealth and the mystery of
phenomena are more obviously recognisable. For the
same reasons the religious outlook must always
be interested in all protests against over-hastiness,
against too great confidence in hypotheses, and against
too rapid simplification and formulation. And it is
not going beyond our province to place some reliance
on the fact that there are increasing signs of revolt
from the too great confidence hitherto shown in relation
to the Theory of Descent. The general frame of the
theory will certainly never be broken, but the enclosed
picture of natural evolution will be less plain and
plausible, more complex and subtle, more full of points
of interrogation and recognitions of the limits of our
knowledge and the depths of things.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Darwinism In The Strict Sense.</head>

<p>
It remains for us to consider what is essentially
Darwinian in Darwinism, namely, the theory of natural
selection as the determining factor in evolution. For,
given the reality of evolution and descent, and that transformations
from one form to another, from lower to
higher, have really taken place, what was the guiding
and impelling factor in evolution, what forced it forwards
and upwards? It is here that the real problem of
Darwinism begins. Only from this point onwards does
the doctrine of evolution, which is not in itself necessarily
committed to any theory of the factors, become definitely
Darwinian or anti-Darwinian. And it is this problem
that is mainly concerned in the discussions taking place
to-day as to whether Darwin was right, or whether
Darwinism as a hypothesis has not broken down.
</p>

<p>
The most characteristic feature of Darwin's theory
was <q>natural teleology,</q> that is, the explanation of
what is apparently full of purpose and plan in the
world, purely as the necessary consequence of very
simple conditions, without purpose or any striving after
an aim. He sought to show that evolution and ascent
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
can be realised through purely <q>natural</q> causes, that
this world of life, man included, must have come about,
but not because it was intended so to do. In this
sense, indeed, his doctrine is an attempt to do away
with teleology. But in another sense it is so even
more emphatically. The world, and especially the
world of life, is undoubtedly full of what is <hi rend='italic'>de facto</hi>
purposive. The living organism, as a whole and in
every one of its parts, is marvellously adapted to the
end of performing its functions, maintaining its own
life and reproducing. Every single living being is a
miracle of inexhaustible adaptations to an end. Whence
came these? They, too, are products, unsought for,
unintended, and yet necessary, and coming about <q>of
themselves,</q> that is without teleological or any supernatural
guiding principles. To eliminate purpose and
the purposive creating and guiding activity of transcendental
principles from interpretations of nature, and to
introduce purely naturalistic principles&mdash;<q>principles of
chance,</q> if we understand chance in this connection
not as opposed to necessity, but to plan and purpose&mdash;this
is the aim of the Darwinian theory. And it only
becomes definitely anti-theological because it is anti-teleological.
</p>

<p>
The conclusions which Darwin arrived at as to the
factors in the transformation of species, and in the production
of <q>adaptations,</q> have been in part supported by
the specialists he influenced, in part strengthened, but in
part modified and even reversed, so that a great crisis
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
has come about in regard to Darwinism in the strict
sense&mdash;a crisis which threatens to be fatal to it. We
must here attempt to take a general survey of the state
of the question and to define our own position.
</p>

<p>
Darwin's interpretation is well known. It is the
theory of the natural selection of the best adapted
through the struggle for existence, which is of itself a
natural selection, and results in the sifting out of particular
forms and of higher forms. Darwin's thinking
follows the course that all anti-teleological thought has
followed since the earliest times. In bringing forth the
forms of life, nature offers, without choice or aim or
intention, a wealth of possibilities. The forms which
happen to be best adapted to the surrounding conditions
of life maintain themselves, and reproduce; the
others perish, and are eliminated (survival of the
fittest). Thus arises adaptation at first in the rough,
but gradually in more and more minute detail. This
adaptation, brought about by chance, gives <emph>the impression</emph>
of intelligent creative purpose.
</p>

<p>
In Darwin this fundamental mode of naturalistic
interpretation took, under the influence of the social-economic
theories of Malthus, the special form of
natural selection by means of the struggle for existence,
in association with the assumption of unlimited and
fluctuating variability in the forms of life. All living
beings have a tendency to increase in number without
limit. But the means of subsistence and other conditions
of existence do not increase at the same
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
rate; they are relatively constant. Thus competition
must come about. Any organism that is, by fortuitous
variation, more favourably equipped than its
fellows maintains itself and reproduces itself; the less
favoured perish. For all things living are exposed
to enemies, to untoward circumstances, and the like.
Every individual favoured above its rivals persists, and
can transmit to its descendants its own more favourable,
more differentiated, more highly equipped character.
Thus evolution is begun, and is forced on into the ever
more diverse and ever <q>higher.</q>
</p>

<p>
To Darwin this struggle for existence and this selection
according to utility seemed, at any rate, the chief
factor in progress. He did, indeed, make some concessions
to the Lamarckian principle that new characters
may be acquired by increased use, and to other <q>secondary</q>
principles. But these are of small importance as
compared with his main factor.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Differences of Opinion As To the Factors In
Evolution.</head>

<p>
The theory of natural selection in the struggle for
existence rapidly gained wide acceptance, but from the
first it was called in question from many sides. Bronn,
who translated Darwin's works into German, was and
remained loyal to the idea of a <q>developmental law</q>&mdash;that
there is within the organism an innate tendency
towards self-differentiation and progress, thus a purely
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
teleological principle.<note place='foot'>See H. G.
Bronn's Appendix to his translation of Darwin's
<q>Origin of Species.</q> First German edition.</note> Similarly, von Baer emphasised
the idea of an endeavour to realise an aim; von
Kölliker, that of <q>heterogenesis</q>; Nägeli, that of an
impulse towards perfection&mdash;all three thus recognising
the theory of evolution, but dissenting from the view
that the struggle for existence is the impelling factor
and actual guide in the process. Very soon, in another
direction, antagonism became pronounced between the
strictly Darwinian elements of the theory (the struggle
for existence and its corollaries) and the accessory
Lamarckian elements. Through these and other controversies
the present state of the question has
emerged.
</p>

<p>
The main antithesis at present is the following. On
the one side, the <q>all-sufficiency of natural selection</q> is
maintained, that is, progressive evolution is regarded as
coming about without direct self-exertion on the part
of the organisms themselves, simply through the fact
that fortuitous variations are continually presenting
themselves, and are being selected and established
according to their utility in the struggle for existence.
On the other side&mdash;with Lamarck&mdash;the progress is
regarded as due to effort and function on the part
of the organism itself. (Increased use of an organ
strengthens it; a changed use transforms it; disuse
causes it to degenerate. Thus new characters appear,
old ones pass away, and in the course of thousands of
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
years the manifold diversity of the forms of life has
been brought about.)
</p>

<p>
Further, by those of the one side variation is regarded
as occurring by the smallest steps that could have
selective value in the struggle for existence. To the others
variation seems to have taken place by leaps and bounds,
with relatively sudden transformations of the functional
and structural equilibrium on a large scale. In regard
to these the <hi rend='italic'>rôle</hi> of the struggle for existence must be
merely subsidiary. This saltatory kind of evolution-process
is called <q>halmatogenesis,</q> or, more neatly, <q>kaleidoscopic
variation,</q> because, as the pictures in a kaleidoscope
change not gradually but by a sudden leap to an
essentially new pattern, so also do the forms of life.
Associated with this is the following contrast. One side
believes in free and independent variation of any organ,
any part, any function, physical or mental, any instinct,
and so on, apart from change or persistence in the rest
of the organism; the other side believes in the close
connectedness of every part with the whole, in the strict
<q>correlation</q> of all parts, in variation in one part being
always simultaneously associated with variation in many
other parts, all being comprised in the <q>whole,</q> which
is above and before all the parts and determines them.
And further, to one school variation seems without plan
in all directions, simply plus or minus on either side of
a mean; to the other, variation seems predetermined
and in a definite direction&mdash;an <q>orthogenesis,</q> in fact,
which is inherent in the organism, and which is indifferent
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
to utility or disadvantage, or natural selection,
or anything else, but simply follows its prescribed path
in obedience to innate law. The representatives of this
last position differ again among themselves. Some
regard it as true in detail, in regard, for instance, to
the markings of a butterfly's wing, the striping of a
caterpillar, the development of spots on a lizard; while
others regard it as governing the general process of
evolution as a whole. Finally, there is the most important
contrast of all. On the one side, subordination,
passivity, complete dependence on the selective or directive
factors in evolution, which alone have any power;
on the other, activity, spontaneous power of adaptation
and transformation, the relative freedom of all things
living, and&mdash;the deepest answer to the question of the
controlling force in evolution&mdash;<emph>the secret of life</emph>. This
last contrast goes deeper even than the one we have
already noted, that between the Darwinian and the
Lamarckian principle of explanation; and it leads
ultimately from the special Darwinian problem to quite
a new one, to be solved by itself&mdash;the problem of the
nature and secret of living matter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Weismannism.</head>

<p>
In regard to almost all the points to which we have
referred, the most consistent and decided champion of
Darwinism in its essential principles is the zoologist of
Freiburg, August Weismann.<note place='foot'>Finally and comprehensively in the two
volumes we have already mentioned, <q>Vorträge über die Deszendenztheorie,</q> Jena,
1902 (Eng. trans., London, 1904). <q>Natural selection depends
essentially upon the cumulative augmentation of the most minute
useful variations in the direction of their utility; only the useful is
developed and increased, and great effects are brought about slowly
through the summing up of many very minute steps.... But the
philosophical significance of natural selection lies in the fact that it
shows us how to explain the origin of useful, well-adapted structures
purely by mechanical factors, and without having to fall back upon
a directive principle.</q></note> In long chapters on
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
the protective coloration of animals, on the phenomena
of mimicry&mdash;that resemblance to foreign objects (leaves,
pieces of wood, bark, and well-protected animals) by
which the mimics secure their own safety from enemies&mdash;on
the protective devices in plants, the selective value
of <q>the useful</q> is demonstrated. In regard to the
marvellous phenomena of <q>carnivorous</q> plants, the
still more marvellous instincts of animals, which cannot
be interpreted on Lamarckian lines as <q>inherited habit,</q>
but only as due to the cumulative influence of selection
on inborn tendencies, as well as in regard to <q>symbiosis,</q>
<q>the origin of flowers,</q> and so on, he attempts
to show that the heterodox attempts at explanation are
insufficient, and that selection alone really explains. At
the same time the Darwinian principle is carried still
further. It is not only among the individuals, the
<q>persons,</q> that the selective struggle for existence goes
on. Personal selection depends upon a <q>germinal
selection</q> within the germ-plasm, influencing it, and
being influenced by it&mdash;for instance, restrained.
</p>

<p>
In order to explain the mystery of heredity, Weismann
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
long ago elaborated, in his germ-plasm theory,
the doctrine that the developing individual is materially
preformed, or rather predetermined in the <q>idants</q>
and <q>ids</q> of the germ-cell. Thus every one of its
physical characters (and, through these, its psychical
characters), down to hairs, skin spots, and birth-marks,
is represented in the <q>id</q> by <q>determinants</q> which
control the <q>determinates</q> in development. In the
course of their growth and development these determinants
are subject to diverse influences due to the
position they happen to occupy, to their quality, to
changes in the nutritive conditions, and so on. Through
these influences variations in the determinants may be
brought about. And thus there comes about a
<q>struggle</q> and a process of selection among the determinants,
the result of which is expressed in changes in
the determinates, in the direction of greater or less
development. On this basis Weismann attempts to
reach explanations of the phenomena of variation, of
many apparently Lamarckian phenomena, and of recognised
cases of <q>orthogenesis,</q> and seeks to complete
and deepen Roux's theory of the <q>struggle of parts,</q>
which was just another attempt to carry Darwinism
within the organism.
</p>

<p>
What distinguishes Weismann, and makes him especially
useful for our present purpose of coming to an
understanding in regard to the theory of selection is,
that his views are unified, definite and consistent. In
his case we have not to clear up the ground and to
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
follow things out to their conclusions, nor to purge his
theories from irrelevant, vitalistic, or pantheistic accessory
theories, as we have, for instance, in the case of
Haeckel. His book, too, is kept strictly within its own
limits, and does not attempt to formulate a theory of
the universe in general, or even a new religion on the
basis of biological theories. Let us therefore inquire
what has to be said in regard to this clearest and best
statement of the theory of selection when we consider it
from the point of view of the religious conception of
the world.
</p>

<p>
Whatever else may be said as to the all-sufficiency of
natural selection there can be no doubt that it presupposes
two absolute mysteries which defy naturalistic
explanation and every other, and which are so important
that in comparison with them the problem of the
struggle for efficacy and its meaning fades into insignificance.
These are the functions and capacities of
living organisms in general, and in particular those of
variation and inheritance, of development and self-differentiation.
What is, and whence comes this mysterious
power of the organism to build itself up from
the smallest beginnings, from the germ? And the
equally mysterious power of faithfully repeating the
type of its ancestors? And, again, of varying and
becoming different from its ancestors? Even the
<q>mechanical</q> theory of selection is forced to presuppose
the secret of life. Weismann indeed attempts
to solve this riddle through his germ-plasm theory, the
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
predisposition of the future organism in the <q>ids,</q> determinants,
and biophors, and through the variation of the
determinants in germinal selection, amphimixis and so
on. But this is after all only shifting the problem to
another place, and translating the mystery into algebraical
terms, so to speak, into symbols with which one
can calculate and work for a little, which formulate
a definite series of observations, an orderly sequence of
phenomena, which are, however, after all, <q>unknown
quantities</q> that explain nothing.
</p>

<p>
In order to explain the developing organism Weismann
assumes that each of its organs or parts, or <q>independent
regions,</q> is represented in the germ-plasm by
a determinant, upon the fate of which the development
of the future determinate depends. It is thought of as
a very minute corpuscle of living matter. Thus there
are determinants of hairs and scales, pieces of skin, pits,
marks, &amp;c. But every determined organ, or part, or
<q>independent region,</q> is itself in its turn an <q>organism,</q>
is indeed a system of an infinite number of interrelated
component parts, and each of these again is
another, down to the individual cells. And each cell
is an <q>organism</q> in itself, and so on into infinity. Is
all this represented in the determinants? And how?
</p>

<p>
Further, the individual determinate, for instance of a
piece of skin, is not something isolated, but passes over
without definite boundary into others. Therefore the determinants
also cannot be isolated, but must be systems
within systems, dependent upon and merging into
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
one another. How, at the building up of the organism,
do the determinants find their direction and their
localisation? And, especially, how do they set to work
to build up their organ? Here the whole riddle of
the theory of epigenesis, which Weismann wished to do
away with as a mystery, is repeated a thousand times
and made more difficult. In order to explain puzzling
processes on a large scale, others have been constructed,
which on close investigation prove to be just the same
mysterious and unexplained processes, only made
infinitely smaller.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, even if the whole of <q>Weismannism,</q>
including germinal selection, could be accepted, and if
it were as sufficient as it is insufficient, what we advanced
at the end of Chapter III. as a standpoint of
general validity in relation to teleology and theology
would still hold good. Even an entirely naïve,
anthropomorphic, <q>supernatural</q> theology is ready
to see, in the natural course of things, in the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causæ
secundariæ,</foreign></q> the realisation of Divine purpose, teleology,
and does not fail to recognise that the Divine purpose may
fulfil itself not only in an extraordinary manner, through
<q>miracles</q> and <q>unconditioned</q> events, but also in
ordinary ways, <q>through means</q> and the universal causal
nexus. Thus it is quite consistent even with a theology
of this kind to regard the whole system of causes and
effects, which, according to the Darwin-Weismann doctrine,
have gradually brought forth the whole diversity of
the world of life, with man at its head, in a purely causal
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
way without teleological intervention, as an immense
system of means marvellous in its intricacy, in the
inevitable necessity of its inter-relations, and in the
exactness of its work, the ultimate result of which <emph>must</emph>
have come about, but perhaps at the same time was
<emph>intended</emph> to come about. Whether I regard this
ultimate result as the mere consequence of blind happenings,
or as an intended purpose, does not depend, as we
have seen, upon the knowledge gained by natural
science, but depends above all on whether this ultimate
result seems to me of sufficient <emph>value</emph> to be thought of
as the purpose of a world-governing intelligence, and
thus depends upon my personal attitude to human
nature, reason, mind, and the spiritual, religious, and
moral life. If I venture to attribute worth, and absolute
worth, to these things, nothing, not even the
fact of the <q>struggle for existence</q> in its thousand
forms, in its gradually transforming effects, in the almost
endless nexus of its causes and results, germinal
selection included, can take away my right (and eventually
my duty) to regard the ultimate result <emph>as an end</emph>,
and the nexus of causes as a system of means. To
enable me to do this, it is only requisite that internal
necessity should govern the system, and that the result
should not be a chance one, so that it might even have
been suppressed, have failed, or have turned out quite
differently. Necessity and predetermination are characteristic
of the relation between means and purpose.
But this requisite is precisely that which natural science
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
does afford us,&mdash;namely, the proof that all phenomena
are strictly governed by law, and are absolutely predetermined
by their antecedents. At this point the religious
and the scientific consideration coincide exactly.
The hairs of our head, and the hairs in the fur of a
polar bear, which is varying towards white, and is therefore
selected in the struggle for existence,<note place='foot'>If it
were not white it would be observed by the seals, which
would thus avoid being devoured by it. See Weismann, I., p. 70.
(English edition, p. 65.)</note> even the
fluctuating variations of a determinant in the germ, are
<q>numbered</q> according to both conceptions. Every
variation that cropped up, every factor that <q>selected</q>
the fit, and eliminated the unfit, was strictly predestined,
and must of necessity have appeared as, and when, and
where it did appear.<note place='foot'>It is almost
comical when Weismann, the champion of the purely
naturalistic outlook, occasionally forgets his rôle altogether, and
puts in a word for <q>chance,</q> or attempts to soften absolute predetermination.
For if even a single wolf should destroy a stag <q>by
chance,</q> or if a single <q>id</q> should <q>chance</q> to grow in a manner
slightly different from that laid down for it by the compelling force of
preceding and accompanying circumstances, the whole Darwinian
edifice would be labour lost.</note>
</p>

<p>
The whole nexus of conditions and results, the inclined
plane of evolution and the power of Being to move up
it, has its sufficient reason in the nature and original
state of the cosmos, in the constitution of its <q>matter,</q>
its <q>energy,</q> its laws, its sequences and the grouping
of its phenomena. Only from beginnings so constituted
could our present world have come to be as it is, and
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
that necessarily. Only because the primary possibility
and fitness for life&mdash;vegetable, animal and human&mdash;was
in it from the beginning, could all these have come
to be. This primary possibility did not <q>come into
being,</q> it was <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> immanent in it. Whence came
this? There is no logical, comprehensible, or any other
necessity why there should be a world at all, or why it
should be such that life and evolution must become
part of it. Where then lies the reason why it is, rather
than is not, and why it is as it is?
</p>

<p>
To this must be added what Weismann himself readily
admits and expressly emphasises. The whole theory
treats, and must treat plant, animal, and man as only
ingenious machines, mere systems of physical processes.
This is the ideal aimed at&mdash;to interpret all the phenomena
of life, growth, and reproduction thus. Even
instincts and mental endowments are so interpreted,
since there must be corresponding morphological variations
of the fine structure of the nervous organ, and
instinctive actions are then <q>explained</q> as the functions
of these. But how <q>mechanical happening</q>
comes to have this marvellous inwardness, which we call
sensation, feeling, perception, thought and will, which
is neither mechanical nor derivable from anything
mechanical; and, further, how physical and psychical
can condition one another without doing violence to
the law of the conservation of the sum of energy, is an
absolute riddle. But this whole psychical world exists,
with graduated stages perhaps as close to each other as
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
in the physical world, but even less capable than these
of being explained as having arisen out of their antecedent
lower stages. And this psychical world, which
is, indeed, related to and dependent upon the corporeal
life, as also conversely, has its own quite peculiar laws:
thought does not follow natural laws, but those of
logic, which is entirely indifferent to exciting stimuli,
for instance of the brain, which conform to
natural laws. But this world, its riddles and mysteries,
its great content and its history, beyond the reach of
mechanical theories, is so absolutely the main thing
(especially in regard to the question of the possibility
of religion), that the question of bodily structure and
evolution becomes beside it a mere accessory problem,
and even the last is only a relatively unimportant
roundabout way of coming at the gist of the business.
How completely the evolution of the higher mental
faculties transcends such narrow and meagre formulæ as
the struggle for existence and the like, Weismann himself
indicates in connection with man's musical sense, and
its relation to the <q>musical</q> instinct in animals. The
same and much more might be alleged in regard to the
whole world of mind, of the æsthetic, ethical and
religious, of the kingdom of thought, of science, and of
poetry.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Natural Selection.</head>

<p>
We have for the moment provisionally admitted
the theory of natural selection, in order to see
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
whether it could be included in a religious interpretation
of things. But in reality such an admission is not
to be thought of, in face of what is at present so
apparent&mdash;the breaking down of this hypothesis, which
has been upheld with so much persistence. We shall
have to occupy ourselves with this later on. In the
meantime a few more remarks must be added to what
has been already said.
</p>

<p>
It might be said, paradoxically, that the worst fate
that could befall this hypothesis would be to be proved,
for then it would be most certainly refuted. What we
mean is this: If it is really <q>utility</q> that rules the
world and things, there can be no certainty and objectivity
of knowledge, no guarantee of truth. The
<q>struggle for existence</q> is not concerned with selecting
beings who see the world as it is. It selects only the
interpretation and conception of the environment that
is most serviceable for the existence and maintenance of
the species. But there is nothing to guarantee that
the <q>true</q> knowledge will also be the most useful. It
might quite well be that an entirely subjective and in
itself wholly false interpretation would be the most
serviceable. And if, by some extraordinary chance, the
selected interpretation should be also the true one,
there would be no means of establishing the fact. And
what is true of this interpretation is true also of all
theories that are derived from it, for example of the
theory of selection itself.
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, a great part, perhaps the greatest part
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
of the confidence placed in the theory of selection is
due to an involuntary, but entirely fallacious habit of
crediting it with the probabilities in favour of the
doctrine of descent. The main arguments in favour of
evolution and descent are very often, though unwittingly,
adduced in support of Darwinism in particular.
This is a great mistake. Take, for instance, the
evidence of the <q>palæontological</q> record. It affords
hundreds of proofs of evolution, but not a single proof
of selection. Its <q>intermediate</q> and <q>connecting links</q>
do possibly prove the affiliation of species and the
validity of genealogical trees. But precisely the
<q>intermediate links</q> which <emph>selection</emph> requires&mdash;the
myriads of forms of life which were not successfully
adapted, the unfit competitors in the struggle for
existence which must have accompanied the favourably
adapted variants from step to step, from generation to
generation&mdash;these are altogether awanting.
</p>

<p>
Another circumstance seems to us to have been
entirely overlooked, and it is one which gives the
theory of selection an inevitable appearance of truth,
even if it is essentially false, and thus makes it very
difficult to refute. Assuming that the recognition of
teleological factors is valid, that there is an inward law
of development, that <q>Moses</q> or whoever one will was
undoubtedly right, it is self-evident that, because of
the indubitable over-production of organisms, there
would even then be a struggle for existence on an
immense scale, and that it would have a far-reaching
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
<q>selective</q> influence, because of the relative plasticity
of many forms of life. Beyond doubt it would, in the
course of æons, have applied its shears to many forms of
life, and probably there would be no organisms, organs,
or associations in the evolution of the ultimate form
of which it had not energetically co-operated. Its
influence would, perhaps, be omnipresent, yet it might
be far from being the all-sufficient factor in evolution;
indeed, as far as the actual impulse of evolution is
concerned, it might be a mere accessory. Unless we
are to think of the forms of life as wholly passive and
wooden, the struggle for existence must necessarily be
operative, and the magnitude of its results, and their
striking and often bizarre outcome, will tend ever anew
to conceal the fact that the struggle is after all only an
inevitable accompaniment of evolution. And thus we
understand how it is that interpretations from the
point of view of an inward law of development, of
orthogenesis, or of teleology, notwithstanding their
inherent validity, have <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> always had a relatively
difficult position as compared with the Darwinian
view.
</p>

<p>
It is usual to speak of the <q>all-sufficiency of natural
selection,</q> yet the champion of the selection-theory
admits, as he needs must, that the struggle for existence
and selection can of themselves create absolutely
nothing, no new character, no new or higher
combination of the vital elements; they can only take
what is already given; they can only select and eliminate
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
among the wealth of what is offered.<note place='foot'>See Darwin,
<q>... chance variations. Unless such occur, natural
selection can do nothing.</q></note> And the
offerer is Life itself by virtue of its mysterious capacity
for boundless and inexhaustible variability, self-enrichment
and increase. The <q>struggle for existence</q> only
digs the bed through which life's stream flows, draws
the guiding-line, and continually stimulates it to some
fresh revelation of its wealth. But this wealth was there
from the beginning; it was, to use the old word,
<q>potential</q> in the living, and included with it in the
universal being from which life was called forth. The
struggle for existence is only the steel which strikes the
spark from the flint; is, with its infinite forms and components,
only the incredibly complex channel through
which life forces its way upwards. If we keep this
clearly in mind, the alarming and ominous element
in the theory shrinks to half its dimensions.
</p>

<p>
And, finally, if we can rid ourselves of the peculiar
fascination which this theory exercises, we soon begin
to discover what extraordinary improbability and fundamental
artificiality it implies. <q>Utility</q> is maintained
to be that which absolutely, almost tyrannically, determines
form and development in the realm of the
living. Is this an idea that finds any analogy elsewhere
in nature? Those who uphold the theory most
strongly are wont to compare the development of
organisms to crystal-formation in order in some way to
tack on the living to the not-living. Crystal-formation,
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
with its processes of movement and form-development,
is, they say, a kind of connecting link between the living
and the not-living. And in truth we find here, as in the
realm of life, species-formation, development into individuals,
stages and systems. But all this takes place
without any hint of <q>struggle for existence,</q> of laboriously
<q>selective</q> processes, or of ingenious accumulation
of <q>variations.</q> The <q>species</q> of crystals are
formed not according to utility, but according to
inherent, determining laws of development, to which
the diversity of their individual appearances is due. If
<q>Life</q> were only a higher potential of what is already
stirring in crystallisation, as this view suggests, then
we should expect to find fixed tendencies, determined
from within, in accordance with which life would pass
through the cycle of its forms and possibilities, and rise
spontaneously through gradual stages.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Critics Of Darwinism.</head>

<p>
Let us turn now to the other side. What is opposed
to Darwinism in the biological investigations of the
experts of to-day is in part simple criticism of the Darwinian
position as a whole or in some of its details, and
in part constructive individual theories and interpretations
of the evolution of organisms.
</p>

<p>
A. Fleischmann's book, <q>Die Darwinsche Theorie,</q><note place='foot'><q>Die
Darwinsehe Theorie. Gemeinverständliche Vorlesungen
über die Naturphilosophie der Gegenwart gehalten vor Studierenden
aller Fakultäten,</q> Leipzig, 1903. This book is the continuation of
the author's <q>Deszendenztheorie.</q></note>
is professedly only critical. He suggests no theory of
his own as to the evolution of life in contrast to
Darwin's; for, as we have already seen in connection
with his earlier book, <q>Die Deszendenztheorie,</q> he
denies evolution altogether. His agnostic position is
maintained, if possible, more resolutely than before.
Natural science, according to him, must keep to facts.
Drawing conclusions and spinning theories is inexact,
and distracts from objective study. The Darwinian
theory of selection seems to him a particularly good
example of this, for it is built up <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> on theories
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
and hypotheses, it stands apart from experimentation,
and it twists facts forcibly to its own ends. It has,
however, to be acknowledged that Fleischmann's book is
without any <q>apologetic</q> intentions. It holds equally
aloof from teleology. To seek for purposes and aims in
nature he holds to be outside the business of science, as
Kant's <q>Critique of Judgment</q> suffices to show. After
having been more than a decade under the charm of the
theory of selection, Fleischmann knows its fascination
well, but he now regards it as so erroneous that no one
who wishes to do serious work should concern himself
about it at all. Point by point he follows all the
details of Darwin's work, and seeks to analyse the
separate views and theories which go to make up Darwinism
as a whole. Darwin's main example of the
evolution of the modern races of pigeons from one
ancestral form, <hi rend='italic'>Columba livia</hi>, is, according to Fleischmann,
not only unproved but unprovable.<note place='foot'>Fleischmann's
book compares favourably with those of other
naturalists, in that he does not contrast <q>Moses</q> and natural
science, as is customary, but has a deeper knowledge of the modern
view of Genesis I. than is usually found among naturalists, whether
of the <q>positive</q> or <q>negative</q> standpoint.</note> For this
itself is not a unified type. The process of <q>unconscious
selection</q> by man is obscure, and it is not
demonstrable, especially in regard to pigeon-breeding.
It is a hazy idea which cannot be transferred to the
realm of nature. The Malthusian assumption of the
necessity of the struggle for existence is erroneous.
Malthus was wrong in his law of population as applied
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
to human life, and Darwin was still more mistaken
when he transferred it to the organic world in general.
It was mere theory. Statistics should have been collected,
and observations instead of theories should have
been sought for. The alleged superabundance of
organisms is not a fact. The marvellously intertwined
conditions in the economy of nature make the
proportion of supply and demand relatively constant.
And even when there is actual struggle for existence,
advantages of situation,<note place='foot'>See also Wolff.</note>
which are quite indifferent as
far as selection is concerned, are much more decisive
than any variational differences. The theory does not
explain the first origin of new characters, which can
only become advantageous when they have attained to
a certain degree of development. As to the illustrations
of the influence of selection given by Darwin, from the
much discussed fictitious cases, in which the fleet stags
select the lithe wolf, to the marvellous mutual adaptations
of insects and flowers, Fleischmann objects that
there is not even theoretical justification for any one of
them. The spade-like foot of the mole is not <q>more
useful</q> than the form of foot which probably preceded
it (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Goette), it is merely <q>different.</q> For when the
mole took to burrowing in the earth and adapting itself
to that mode of life, it <hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi> forfeited all the advantages
of living above ground. The postulated myriads
of less well-adapted forms of life are no more to be
found to-day than they are in the fauna and flora of
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
palæontological times. The famous giraffe story has
already been disposed of by Mivart's objections. As to
the whales, it is objected that the earliest stages of
their whalebone and their exaggerated nakedness can
have been of no use, and a series of other alleged selective
effects of <q>utility</q> are critically analysed. The
refutation of the most brilliant chapter in the Darwinian
theory, that on protective coloration and mimicry, is
very insufficient. A long concluding chapter sums up
the fundamental defects of the Darwinian theory.
</p>

<p>
For the most part, Fleischmann simply brings forward
objections which have been urged against the theory
of selection from the first, either by naturalists or
from other quarters. The chief and the most fatal of
these which are still current are the following: The
theory of selection does not explain the actually existing
discontinuity of species. The real characteristics which
distinguish species from species are in innumerable cases
quite indifferent from the point of view of <q>utility</q>
(Nägeli, Bateson). <q>Selection preserves the good and
weeds out the bad.</q> But where does the good come
from? (De Vries). The first beginnings of what may
later be useful are almost always useless. The theory
of selection might perhaps explain the useful qualities,
but not the superfluous, useless, or directly injurious
characters which actually exist. Confirmation of the
theory of descent may be found in the palæontological
record, but it affords none of the theory of selection.
Natural selection is continually being neutralised by
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
subsequent inter-crossing and reversion. Natural
selection may indeed prevent degeneration within
the limits of the species by weeding out what is weak
and bad, but it is powerless beyond these limits, and
so forth.<note place='foot'>See C.C. Coe, <q>Nature versus Natural Selection,</q> London,
1895. Perhaps the most comprehensive, many-sided, critical analysis
of the theory of natural selection. See also Herbert Spencer, <q>The
Inadequacy of Natural Selection,</q> 1893.</note>
</p>

<p>
These ever-repeated and ever-increasing objections
are purely critical. As this is true of
Fleischmann's whole book, it is therefore unsatisfactory.
It leaves everything in the mist, and puts
nothing in place of what it attempts to demolish.
But attempts are being made in other quarters,
especially among the Lamarckians, to build up an
opposition theory.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Lamarckism and Neo-Lamarckism.</head>

<p>
The <q>Lamarckian</q> view as opposed to the Darwinian
continues to hold its own, and indeed is more ardently
supported than ever. On this view, evolution has been
accomplished not by a laborious selection of the best
which chanced to present itself&mdash;a selection in relation
to which organisms remained passive, but rather through
the exertions of the organisms themselves. It has been
especially through the use and exercise of the various
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
organs in response to the requirements of life, through
the increased exercise of physical and mental functions,
that the organism has adapted itself more diversely and
more fully to the conditions of its life. What one
generation acquired in differentiation of structure, in
capacities and habits, through its own exertions, it
handed on to the next. By cumulative inheritance there
ultimately arose the fixed specific characters, and the
diversity and progressive gradations of organisms have
gone hand in hand with an ever increasing activity.
And as with the physical so it has been with the mental.
Through continual use and exercise of the functions
their capacity has been increased and modified. Through
the frequent repetition of voluntary actions necessary
to life the habitual use of them has come about. Habits
that have become fixed are correlated with habitual
psychical predispositions. These, gradually handed on
by inheritance to the descendants, have resulted in the
marvellous instincts of animals. Instinct is inherited
habit that has become fixed. Corresponding to this
there is on the other hand the recognition&mdash;in theory
at least&mdash;that the disuse of an organ, the non-exercising
of a function leads to degeneration of structure
and so co-operates in bringing about a gradual but
persistent modification of the features and constitution
of organisms.
</p>

<p>
These views, which have grown out of Lamarck's
fundamental ideas (<q>Philosophie zoologique,</q> 1809) are
now usually associated with the theory advanced chiefly
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
by Etienne Geoffrey St. Hilaire (<q>Philosophie zoologique,</q>
1830), the opponent of Cuvier, and the ally
of Goethe, of the direct influence of the <foreign rend='italic'>monde ambiant</foreign>.
The <q>surrounding world,</q> the influences of climate, of
locality, of the weather, of nutrition, of temperature,
of the salinity of the water, of the moisture in the air,
and all other conditions of existence, influence the living
organism. And they do so not indirectly, as is implied
in the process of selection, simply playing the part of a
sieve, and not themselves moulding and transforming,
but <emph>directly</emph> by necessitating the production of new
developments in the living substance, new chemical
and physiological activities, new groupings and changes
of form, and new organs.
</p>

<p>
Darwin himself did not regard these two theories as
opposed to the theory of selection, but utilised them as
subsidiary interpretations. It is obvious, however, that
at bottom they conceal an essentially different fundamental
idea, which, if followed out to its logical consequences,
reduces the <q>struggle for existence</q> to at
most a wholly indifferent accessory circumstance.
Weismann felt this, and hence his entirely consistent
endeavours to show by great examples, such as the
origin of flowers, the mutual adaptations of flowers and
insects, the phenomena of mimicry, and many other
cases, that neither the Lamarckian nor any other factor
in evolution, except only natural, passive selection,
suffices as an interpretation. From the Darwinian
standpoint he is absolutely right, and must needs speak
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
of the <q>omnipotence of natural selection,</q> for it must
either be omnipotent, or it must give place to the other
two factors, and retain only the significance we attributed
to it in another connection (p. 157), which
amounts to saying none at all. It is obvious enough why
the discussion as to these factors should centre round the
question of the <q>inheritance of acquired characters,</q>
<q>acquired</q> either through the use or disuse of organs,
the exercise or non-exercise of functions, or through the
stimuli of the external world.
</p>

<p>
The neo-Lamarckian conflict with Darwinism has
become more and more acute in recent times, and the
neo-Lamarckians have sometimes passed from contrasting
rival interpretations to excluding the Darwinian
factor altogether. As the particular champion of the
neo-Lamarckian view, we must name Th. Eimer, the
recently deceased Tübingen zoologist. His chief work
is in three volumes, entitled <q>Die Entstehung der Arten
auf Grund von Vererbung erworbener Eigenschaften,
nach Gesetzen organischen Wachsens.</q><note place='foot'>Leipzig,
1888, 1897, 1901. In part translated as <q>Organic
Evolution.</q> We are here mainly concerned with Vols. I. and III.
Later on we shall have to discuss Vol. II.</note> It is a polemic
against Weismannism in all details, even to the theory
of <q>germinal selection.</q> Eimer follows in the footsteps
of St. Hilaire, and shows what a relatively plastic and
sensitive creature the organism is to the surrounding
world, the conditions of nutrition and other such
influences. There is in this connection a particularly
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
instructive chapter on the physiological and other
variations brought about by external influences which
act as <q>stimuli of the nervous system.</q> The whole
theory of Lamarck and St. Hilaire transcends&mdash;notwithstanding
the protests of Eimer to the contrary&mdash;the
categories of the mechanical theory of life, and this
chapter does so in particular. The array of facts here
marshalled as to the spontaneous self-adaptation of
organisms to their environment&mdash;in relation to colour
mainly&mdash;forms the most thoroughgoing refutation
of Darwinism that it is possible to imagine. It is
shown, too, by a wealth of examples from osteology,
how use (and the necessities of the case&mdash;a consideration
which again goes beyond the bounds of mere
Lamarckism) may modify, increase or diminish vertebræ,
ribs, skull and limbs, in short, the whole skeleton.
</p>

<p>
Kassowitz is equally keen and convinced in his opposition
to natural selection, and in his comprehensive
<q>Allgemeine Biologic</q><note place='foot'>Wien, 1899.</note> he attacks orthodox
Darwinism from the neo-Lamarckian standpoint. The
whole of the first volume is almost chapter for chapter
a critical analysis, and the polemical element rather
outweighs his positive personal contribution. He criticises
very severely all attempts to carry the Darwinian
principle of explaining adaptations into internal and
minute details, arguing against Roux's <q>Struggle of
Parts</q> and Weismann's <q>Germinal Selection.</q> And
though he himself maintains very decidedly that the
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
ultimate aim of biology is to find a mechanical solution
of the problem of life, he criticises the modern hypotheses
in this direction without prejudice, and declares
them unsuccessful and insufficient, inclining himself
towards the <q>neo-vitalistic reaction</q> in its most recent
expression. Along with Eimer and Kassowitz, we may
name W. Haacke, especially in relation to his views on
the acquisition and transmission of functional modifications
and his thoroughgoing denial of Darwinism
proper. But his work must be dealt with later in a
different connection.<note place='foot'>See Wettstein,
<q>Neolamarckism,</q> Jena, 1902. See also Demoor,
Massart, Vandervelde, <q>L'Evolution régressive en Biologie et
Sociologie,</q> Paris, 1897. Bibliothèque scientific internationale,
vol. lxxxv. This work is on the Lamarckian basis. It is original in
applying Lamarckian principles to a theory of society.</note>
</p>

<p>
These neo-Lamarckian views give us a picture of the
evolution of the world that is much more convincing
than the strictly Darwinian one. Instead of passive and
essentially unintelligent <q>adaptation</q> through the sieve
of selection, we have here direct self-adaptation of
organisms to the conditions of their existence, through
their own continual restless activity and exertion, an
ascent of their own accord to ever greater heights and
perfections. A theory of this kind might easily form
part of a religious conception of the world. We might
think of the world with primitive tendencies and
capacities, in which the potentialities of its evolution
were implied, and so ordered that it had to struggle by
its own exertions to achieve the full realisation of its
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
possibilities, to attain to ever higher&mdash;up to the
highest&mdash;forms of Being. The process of nature would
thus be the direct anticipation of what occurs in the
history of man and of mind. And the task set to the
freedom of individual men, and to mankind as a whole,
namely, to work out their own nature through their own
labour and exertion, and to ascend to perfection&mdash;this
deepest meaning of all individual and collective existence&mdash;would
have its exact prelude and preparation in
the general nature and evolution of all living creatures.
The transition from these theories of nature to a teleological
outlook from the highest and most human point
of view is so obvious as to be almost unavoidable. And
although a natural science which keeps to its own
business and within its own boundaries has certainly no
right to make this transition for itself, it has still less
right to prevent its being made outside of its limits.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Theory of Definite Variation.</head>

<p>
But the question now arises, whether both Darwinism
and Lamarckism must not be replaced, or at least
reduced to the level of accessory theories and factors,
by another theory of evolution which was in the field
before Darwin, and which since his time has been advanced
anew, especially by Nägeli, and has now many
adherents who support it in whole or in part. This
view affects the very foundations of the Darwinian
doctrine. The theory of <q>indefinite</q> variation, bringing
about easy transitions and affecting every part of
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
the organism separately, which is the necessary correlate
of the <q>struggle for existence,</q> is rejected
altogether. Evolution takes place only along a few
definite lines, predetermined through the internal
organisation and the laws of growth. It is wholly
indifferent to <q>utility,</q> and brings forth only what it
must according to its own inner laws, not seldom even
the monstrous. According to this view, new species
arise, not in easy transition, but with a visible leap, by
a considerable and far-reaching displacement of the
organic equilibrium. What Darwin calls the correlation
of parts, and in no way denies, is here maintained
in strong opposition to his doctrine of the isolated
variation of individual parts; every member or character
of the organism depends upon others, and variation of
one affects many, and in some way all of the rest.
</p>

<p>
This theory is for the most part intended by its
champions to be purely naturalistic. But every one of
its points yields support to teleological considerations,
most obviously so the concrete instances of correlation.
If any one were to attempt to make a theory
of evolution from a decidedly teleological standpoint,
he would probably construct one very similar to the
one we are now considering.
</p>

<p>
It is noteworthy that it has generally been the
botanists who have especially supported these views of
saltatory evolution in a definite direction and according
to internal law, who have therefore tended to react most
strongly from Darwinism. We find examples in Nägeli's
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
large and comprehensive work, <q>Mechanisch-physikalische
Theorie der Abstammungslehre</q>; and, before
him, in Wigand's <q>Darwinismus und die Naturforschung
Newton's und Cuvier's</q>; in von Kölliker's
<q>Heterogenesis</q>; in von Baer's <q>Endeavour after an
End</q>; in the chapter added by the translator, Bronn,
to the first German edition of the <q>Origin of
Species,</q> where he urges weighty objections against the
theory of selection, and refers to the <q>innate impulse
to development, persistently varying in a definite direction</q>;
in Askenasy's oft-quoted <q>Beiträge zur Kritik
der Darwinschen Lehre,</q> also referring to <q>variation
in a definite direction,</q> for instance, in flowers; in
Delpino's views, and in the works of many other older
writers. But we must leave all these out of account
here, since we are concerned only with the present state
of the question.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>De Vries's Mutation-theory.</head>

<p>
The work that has probably excited most interest in
this connection is De Vries' <q>Die Mutationstheorie:
Versuche und Beobachtungen über die Entstehung von
Arten im Pflanzenleben.</q><note place='foot'>Two vols., Leipzig, 1901 and
1902.</note> In a short preliminary
paper he had previously given some account of his
leading experiments on a species of evening primrose
(<hi rend='italic'>Œnothera lamarckiana</hi>), and the outlines of his theory.
In the work itself he extends this, adding much concrete
material, and comparing his views in detail with other
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
theories. Darwin, he says, had already distinguished
between variability and mutability; the former manifesting
itself in gradual and isolated changes, the
latter in saltatory changes on a larger scale. The mistake
made by Wallace and by the later Darwinians has
been that they regarded this latter form (<q>single
variation</q>) as unimportant and not affecting evolution,
and the former as the real method of evolutionary
process. That fluctuating individual variations do occur
De Vries admits, but only within narrow limits, never
overstepping the type of the species. Here De Vries
utilises the recent statistical investigations into the
phenomena of individual variation and their laws, as
formulated chiefly by Quetelet and Bateson, which
were unknown to Darwin and the earlier Darwinians.
The actual transition from <q>species to species</q> is made
suddenly, by mutation, not through variation. And
the state of equilibrium thus reached is such a relatively
stable one that individual variations can only take place
within its limits, but can in no way disturb it.
</p>

<p>
De Vries marshals a series of facts which present insurmountable
difficulties to the Darwinian theory, but
afford corroboration of the Mutation theory. In particular,
he brings forward, from his years of experiment
and horticultural observation, comprehensive evidence
of the mutational origin of new species from old ones by
leaps, and this not in long-past geological times, but in
the course of a human life and before our very eyes. The
main importance of the book lies in the record of these
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
experiments and observations, rather than in the
theory as such, for the way had been paved for it by
other workers.
</p>

<p>
In contrast to Darwinism, De Vries states the case
for <q>Halmatogenesis</q> (saltatory evolution) and <q>Heterogenesis</q>
(the production of forms unlike the
parents), taking his examples from the plant world, but
his attitude to Darwinism is conciliatory throughout.
Eimer, on the other hand, is sharply antagonistic, especially
to Weismann; he takes his proofs from the
animal kingdom, and in the second volume of his large
work already mentioned, which deals with the <q>orthogenesis
of butterflies,</q> he attempts to set against the
Darwinism <q>chance theory,</q> a proof of <q>definitely
directed evolution,</q> and therefore of the <q>insufficiency
of natural selection in the formation of species.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Eimer's Orthogenesis.</head>

<p>
Organisation is due to internal causes. Structural
characters crystallise out, as it were. <q>Orthogenesis,</q>
or the definitely determined tendency of evolution to
advance in a few directions, is a law for the whole
of the animate world. In active response to the
stimuli and influences of the environment the organism
expresses itself in <q>organic growth</q> without any
relation to utility. Butterflies in particular, and
especially their markings and coloration, are taken as
illustrations. In the Darwinian theory of <q>mimicry</q>
these played a brilliant part. The great resemblance
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
to leaves, to dried twigs, or to well-protected species
which are secure from enemies, was regarded as the most
convincing proof of the operation of natural selection.
But Eimer shows that markings, striping, spots, the
development of pattern, and the alleged or real resemblances
to leaves, are really subject to definite laws of
growth, in obedience to which they gradually appear,
developing according to their own internal laws, varying
and progressing altogether by internal necessity, and
without any reference to advantage or disadvantage,
In association with this orthogenesis, Eimer recognises
halmatogenesis, correlation and <q>genepistasis</q> (coming
to a standstill at a fixed and definite stage), and these
seem to him to make the Darwinian theory utterly
impossible. The text and the illustrations of the book
show how, in the sequence of evolution (according
to Eimer's laws of transformation), the groupings of
stripes, bands, and eye-spots must have appeared on
the butterfly's wing, how convex or concave curvings of
the contour must have come about at certain points, so
that the form of a <q>leaf</q> and the lines of its venation
resulted, how the eye-spots must have been moulded and
shunted, so that they produced the effect of rust or
other spots on withered leaves. Particular interest
attaches to the detailed arguments against the idea that
the butterfly must receive some advantage from its
<q>mimicry.</q> Even the Darwinians have to admit that
in a whole series of cases the advantage is not obvious.
They talk with some embarrassment of <q>pseudomimicry.</q>
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
Some butterflies that are supposed to be
protected have the protective markings on the underside,
so that these are actually hidden when the insects
are flying from pursuing birds. Many of the leaf-like
butterflies are not wood-butterflies at all, but meadow
species,<note place='foot'>It remains open to question whether Eimer's explanation is
sufficient in all cases, even those of the exaggeratedly deceptive
copies of leaves or bark, or the colour of the environment. It is
certainly not the sorry explanation in terms of <q>Variation and
Selection,</q> but that of a spontaneous imitation of the surroundings,
that forces itself irresistibly upon us in this connection.</note>
and so Eimer's arguments continue.
</p>

<p>
A specially energetic fellow-worker on Eimer's line
is W. Haacke, a zoologist of Jena, author of <q>Gestaltung
und Vererbung,</q> and <q>Die Schöpfung des Menschen
und seiner Ideale.</q><note place='foot'>Jena, 1892 and 1895.</note>
In the first of these works
Haacke combats, energetically and with much detail,
Weismann's <q>preformation theory,</q> and defends <q>epigenesis,</q>
for which he endeavours to construct graphic
diagrams, his aim being to make a foundation for the
inheritance of acquired characters, definitely directed
evolution, saltatory, symmetrical, and correlated
variation.
</p>

<p>
The principles of the new school are very widespread
to-day, but we cannot here follow their development
in the works of individual investigators,
such as Reinke, R. Hertwig, O. Hertwig, Wiesner,
Hamann, Dreyer, Wolff, Goette, Kassowitz, v. Wettstein,
Korschinsky, and others.<note place='foot'>See Reinke,
<q>Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie,</q> 1901,
especially pp. 463 onwards on <q>Phylogenetisches Bildungspotential.</q>
von Wettstein (On direct adaptation), <q>Neolamarkismus,</q> Jena, 1902.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <q>Wissensch-Beiträge zum 15 Jahresberichte (1902) der Philos.
Gesellschaft an der Universität zu Wien: Vorträge und Besprechungen
über die Krisis der Darwinismus.</q> M. Kassowitz, <q>Allgemeine
Biologie,</q> I. and II., 1899. O. Hertwig, <q>Entwicklung der Biologie
im 19. Jahrhundert.</q> Wiesner, <q>Elemente der wissenschaftlichen
Botanik.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> especially III. <q>Biologie der Pflanzen</q>),
and on p. 288 the summary of propositions which are very similar to those formulated
later by Korschinsky. (<q>Auf Grund des den Organismen
innewohnenden Vervollkommnungstriebes.</q>)</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Spontaneous Activity of the Organism.</head>

<p>
What is particularly luminous in all the theories that
express the most recent anti-Darwinian tendency is
that they tend to bring into prominence the mysterious
powers of living organisms, by means of which, instead
of passively waiting for natural selection and the continual
accumulation of unceasing variations, they are
able spontaneously and of themselves to bring forth
what is necessary for self-maintenance, often what is
new and different, of course not unlimitedly, but with
considerable freedom and often with a surprising range
of possibilities. It is, perhaps, partly the fault of
the one-sidedness of strict Darwinism that this consideration
has been so slowly brought into prominence
and subjected to investigation and experiment. It is
bound up with the capacity that all forms of life
have of reacting spontaneously to <q>stimuli</q> and,
to a certain extent, of helping themselves if the
conditions of existence be unfavourable. They are
able, for instance, to produce protective adaptations
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
against cold or heat, to <q>regenerate</q> lost parts, often
to replace entire organs that have been lost, and,
under certain circumstances, to produce new organs
altogether. If all this be true, it seems almost like
caprice to follow only the roundabout theory of the
struggle for existence, and not to take account of
these spontaneous capacities of the living organism
directly and before all other factors in the attempt
to explain evolution. There is no end to the illustrations
that are being adduced, that must force investigation
to pass from merely superficial considerations
of the struggle for existence type to the deeper
and more real problems themselves.
</p>

<p>
An effectively modified and adapted type of Alpine
flora has not been evolved by a laborious process of
selection lasting for many thousand years; the organism
may quickly and immediately produce the new characters
by its own reaction. Crustaceans gradually transferred
from a salt-water to a fresh-water habitat, or conversely,
produce in a few generations the type of a new <q>species</q>
with correlated variations (Schmankewitsch). Birds
weaned by careful experiment from a diet of seeds to
one of flesh, or conversely, produce changes of effective
correlation and adaptation in the characters of their
alimentary system. Plants that have been deprived of
their normal organs for absorbing water and prevented
from growing new ones produce entirely new and
effective <q>hydatodes.</q><note place='foot'>See
the particularly beautiful and suggestive experiments of
Haberlandt: <q>Experimentelle Hervorrufung eines neuen Organs.</q>
In <q>Festschrift für Schwendener,</q> Berlin Borntraeger, 1899.</note>
</p>

<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>

<p>
It is instructive to notice that Darwinism seems
likely to be robbed of its stock illustration, namely,
<q>protective coloration.</q> By its own internal power of
reaction, and sometimes within one generation, and
even in the lifetime of an individual, an organism may
assume the colour of the substratum beneath it (soles,
grasshoppers), of its surroundings (Eimer's tree frogs),
the colour and spottiness of the granite rock on which
it hangs, the colour of the leaves and twigs among
which it lives (Poulton's butterfly pupæ), and even that
of the brightly coloured sheets of paper amidst which
it is kept imprisoned. Certain spiders assume a white,
pink, or greenish <q>protective coloration</q> corresponding
to the tinted blossom of the plants which they frequent,
and so on.<note place='foot'>See <q>Nature,</q> 1891, p.
441</note> Eimer alleged that direct psychical factors
co-operated in bringing about these changes. In any
case, all this carries us far beyond the domain of
mere naturalistic factors into the mystery of life
itself. Even what is called the <q>influence of the
external world,</q> and the <q>active acquirement of new
characters,</q> have their basis and the reason of their
possibility in this domain. And the whole domain
is saturated through and through with <q>teleology.</q>
</p>

<p>
A recognition of the impressive secret of the organism
led Gustav Wolff to become a very pronounced critic
of Darwinism, especially in the form of Weismannism.
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
As far back as 1896, in a lecture <q>On the present
position of Darwinism,</q> in which he dealt only with
Weismann, he criticised and analysed that author's last
attempt to uphold Darwinism by the construction of
his theory of <q>germinal selection.</q> He concluded with
the wish:
</p>

<p>
<q>That a spirit of earnestness would once more
enter into biological investigation, which would no
longer attempt to find in nature just what it wanted
to find, but would be ready to follow truth at all
costs, and to approach the riddle of life with an open
mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
His <q>Beiträge zur Kritik der Darwinischen Lehre,</q>
which appeared first as papers in the <q>Biologisches
Centralblatt,</q> did not see the light in book form until
1898. The doctrine of selection was regarded as so
unassailable that no publisher would take the risk of
the book. Its appearance is a sure indication of the
general modification of opinions that had taken place
in the interval. The first and second essays are merely
critical objections to the theory of selection, very
similar to those frequently urged before, but more
precisely stated.<note place='foot'>See <q>Nature,</q> 1891, p.
441.</note> The third is intended to show that
there is in the forms of life themselves, as a faculty of
adaptation peculiar to them, a primary purposiveness,
which is unquestionably active throughout the lifetime
and development of every individual, but which is also
the deepest cause of <q>phylogenesis,</q> or the formation
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
of a race. This doctrine makes both the Darwinian
and Lamarckian theories merely secondary. For the
phenomena which suggest the Lamarckian interpretation
presuppose this most essential factor&mdash;the primary
adaptiveness. Wolff concludes with a very striking
instance&mdash;discovered by himself&mdash;of this primary adaptiveness
of the organism&mdash;the regeneration of the lens
in the newt's eye.
</p>

<p>
More comprehensively, but from a precisely similar
standpoint, Driesch has followed up the discussion of
this problem.<note place='foot'><p>The variation-increment
of the selection theory ought to be a
differential. But in many cases it is not so. As for instance in
symmetrical correlated variation, &amp;c. In the struggle for existence
it is usually not advantages of organisation which are decisive, but
the chance advantages of situation, though these have no <q>selective</q>
influence. The case of the tapeworm is illustrative.
</p>
<p>
His work, <q>Die organischen Regulationen, Vorbereitungen zu
einer Theorie des Lebens,</q> 1901, is a systematic survey of illustrations
of the <q>autonomy</q> of vital processes. In his <q>Analytischen
Theorie der organischen Entwicklung,</q> Leipzig, 1894, his special
biological (<q>ontogenetic</q>) views are still in process of development.
But even here his sharp rejection of Darwinism is complete (see VI.,
Par. 3, on <q>the absurd assumption of a contingent character of
morphogenesis</q>). It is not for nothing that the book is dedicated
to Wigand and C. F. von Baer. He says that in regard to development
we must <q>picture to ourselves external agents acting as
stimuli and achieving transformations which have the character,
not analysable as to its causes, of being adapted to their end,
that is, capable of life.</q> Incomplete, but very instructive too,
are his discussions on the causal and the teleological outlook, the
necessity for both, and the impossibility of eliminating the latter
from the study of nature. In a series of subsequent works, Driesch
has defined and strengthened this position, finally reaching the
declaration: <q>Darwin belongs to history, just like that other
curiosity of our century, the Hegelian philosophy. Both are variations
on the theme, <q>How to lead a whole generation by the nose!</q></q>
(<q>Biolog. Zentralbl.</q> 1896, p. 16). We are concerned with Driesch
more particularly in Chapter IX.</p></note> He is, of all modern investigators, perhaps
the one who has most persistently and thoroughly
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
worked out the problem of causal and teleological
interpretation, and he has also thrown much light on
the scientific and epistemological aspects of the problem.
That he could, in a recent volume of the <q>Biologisches
Zentralblatt,</q> write a respectful and sympathetic exposition
of the Hegelian nature-philosophy&mdash;as regards
its aims, though not its methods&mdash;is as remarkable a
symptom as we can instance of the modern trend of
views and opinions.<note place='foot'>See Driesch
<q>Kritisches und Polemisches,</q> Biol. Zentrabl., 1902,
p. 187, Note 2.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Contrast Between Darwinian and Post-Darwinian
Views.</head>

<p>
The new views that have thus arisen have been
definitely summarised and clearly contrasted with
Darwinism by the botanist Korschinsky. He died
before completing his general work, <q>Heterogenesis
und Evolution,</q> but he has elsewhere<note place='foot'><q>Naturwissenschaftliche
Wochenschrift,</q> xiv., p. 273.</note> given an excellent
summary of his results, which we append in abstract.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(1) Everything organic is
capable of variation. Variations
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
arise in part from internal, in
part from external causes. They
are slight, inconspicuous, individual
differences.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(1) Everything organic is
capable of variation. This
capability is a fundamental, inherent
character of living forms
in general, and is independent of
external conditions. It is usually
kept latent by <q>heredity,</q> but
occasionally breaks forth in
sudden variations.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(2) The struggle for existence.
This combines, increases, fixes
useful variations, and eliminates
the useless. All the characters
and peculiarities of a finished
species are the results of long-continued
selection; they must
therefore be adapted to the
external conditions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(2) Saltatory variations.&mdash;These
are, under favourable circumstances,
the starting-point of
new and constant races. The
characters may sometimes be useful,
sometimes quite indifferent,
neither advantageous nor disadvantageous.
Sometimes they
are not in harmony with external
circumstances.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(3) The species is subject to
constant variation. It is continually
subject to selection and
augmentation of its characters.
Hence again the origin of new
species.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(3) All fully developed species
persist, but through heterogenesis
a splitting up into new forms
may take place, and this is
accompanied by a disturbance of
the vital equilibrium. The new
state is at first insecure and
fluctuating, and only gradually
becomes stable. Thus new forms
and races arise with gradual
consolidation of their constitution.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(4) The sharper and more acute
the effect of the environment,
the keener is the struggle for
existence, and the more rapidly
and certainly do new forms
arise.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(4) Only in specially favourable
conditions, only when the
struggle for existence is weak, or
when there is none, can new
forms arise and become fixed.
When the conditions are severe
no new forms arise, or if they do
they are speedily eliminated.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(5) The chief condition of evolution
is therefore the struggle
for existence and the selection
which this involves.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(5) The struggle for existence
simply decimates the overwhelming
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
abundance of possible forms.
Where it occurs it prevents the
establishment of new variations,
and in reality stands in the way
of new developments. It is
rather an unfavourable than an
advantageous factor.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(6) If there were no struggle
for existence there would be no
adaptation, no perfecting.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(6) Were there no struggle for
existence, there would be no
destruction of new forms, or of
forms in process of arising. The
world of organisms would then
be a colossal genealogical tree of
enormous luxuriance, and with
an incalculable wealth of forms.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Darwin.</hi>
(7) Progress in nature, the
<q>perfecting</q> of organisms, is
only an increasingly complex
and ever more perfect adaptation
to the external circumstances.
It is attained by purely mechanical
methods, by an accumulation
of the variations most useful at
the time.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Korschinsky and the Moderns.</hi>
(7) The adaptation which the
struggle for existence brings
about has nothing to do with
perfecting, for the organisms
which are physiologically and
morphologically higher are by no
means always better adapted to
external circumstances than those
lower in the scale. Evolution
cannot be explained mechanically.
The origin of higher forms from
lower is only possible if there is
a tendency to progress innate
in the organism itself. This
tendency is nearly related to or
identical with the tendency
to variation. It compels the
organism to perfect itself as far
as external circumstances will
permit.
</p>

<p>
All this implies an admission of evolution and of
descent, but a setting aside of Darwinism proper as an
unsuccessful hypothesis, and a positive recognition of
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
an endeavour after an aim, internal causes, and teleology
in nature, as against fortuitous and superficial
factors. This opens up a vista into the background of
things, and thereby yields to the religious conception all
that a study of nature can yield&mdash;namely, an acknowledgment
of the possibility and legitimacy of interpreting
the world in a religious sense, and assistance in
so doing.
</p>

<p>
The most important point has already been emphasised.
Even if the theory of the struggle for existence
were correct, it would be possible to subject the world
as a whole to a teleological interpretation. But these
anti-Darwinian theories now emerging, though they do
not directly induce teleological interpretation, suggest
it much more strongly than orthodox Darwinism does.
A world which in its evolution is not exposed, for good
or ill, to the action of chance factors&mdash;playing with it
and forcing it hither and thither&mdash;but which, exposed
indeed to the most diverse conditions of existence and
their influences, and harmonising with them, nevertheless
carries implicitly and infallibly within itself the
laws of its own expression, and especially the necessity
to develop upwards into higher and higher forms, is
expressly suited for teleological consideration, and we
can understand how it is that the old physico-teleological
evidences of the existence of God are beginning
to hold up their heads again. They are wrong when
they try to demonstrate God, but quite right when
they simply seek to show that nature does not contradict&mdash;in
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
fact that it allows room and validity to&mdash;belief
in the Highest Wisdom as the cause and guide of
all things natural.
</p>

<p>
As far as the question of the right to interpret
nature teleologically is concerned, it would be entirely
indifferent whether what Korschinsky calls <q>the tendency
to progress,</q> and the system of laws in obedience
to which evolution brings forth its forms, can be interpreted
<q>mechanically</q> or not; that is to say, whether
or not evolution depends on conditions and potentialities
of living matter, which can be demonstrated
and made mechanically commensurable or not. It may
be that they can neither be demonstrated nor made
mechanically commensurable, but lie in the impenetrable
mystery inherent in all life. Whether this
mystery really exists, and whether religion has any
particular interest in it if it does, must be considered in
the following chapter.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Mechanical Theory Of Life.</head>

<p>
What is life&mdash;not in the spiritual and transcendental
sense, but in its physical and physiological aspects?
What is this mysterious complex of processes and
phenomena, common to everything animate, from the
seaweed to the rose, and from the human body to the
bacterium, this ability to <q>move</q> of itself, to change
and yet to remain like itself, to take up dead substances
into itself, to assimilate and to excrete, to
initiate and sustain, in respiration, in nutrition, in
external and internal movements, the most complex
chemical and physical processes, to develop and build
up through a long series of stages a complete whole
from the primitive beginnings in the germ, to grow, to
become mature, and gradually to break up again, and
with all this to repeat in itself the type of its parent,
and to bring forth others like itself, thus perpetuating
its own species, to react effectively to stimuli, to produce
protective devices against injury, and to regenerate
lost parts? All this is done by living organisms,
all this is the expression in them of <q>Life.</q> What is it?
Whence comes it? And how can it be explained?
</p>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<p>
The problem of the nature of life, of the principle of
vitality, is almost as old as philosophy itself, and from
the earliest times in which men began to ponder over
the problem, the same antitheses have been apparent
which we find to-day. Disguised under various catchwords
and with the greatest diversities of expression, the
antitheses remain essentially the same through the
centuries, competing with one another, often mingling
curiously, so that from time to time one or other almost
disappears, but always crops up again, so that it seems
as if the conflict would be a never-ending one&mdash;the
antitheses between the mechanical and the <q>vitalistic</q>
view of life. On the one side there is the conviction
that the processes of life may be interpreted in terms
of natural processes of a simple and obvious kind,
indeed directly in terms of those which are most
general and most intelligible&mdash;namely, the simplest
movements of the smallest particles of matter, which
are governed by the same laws as movement in general.
And associated with this is the attempt to take away
any special halo from around the processes of life,
to admit even here no other processes but the mechanical
ones, and to explain everything as the effect of
material causes. On the opposite side is the conviction
that vital phenomena occupy a special and peculiar
sphere in the world of natural phenomena, a higher
platform; that they cannot be explained by merely
physical or chemical or mechanical factors, and that, if
<q>explaining</q> means reducing to terms of such factors,
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
they do in truth include something inexplicable. These
opposing conceptions of the living and the organic
have been contrasted with one another, in most precise
form and exact expression, by Kant in certain chapters
of the Kritik der Urteilskraft, which must be regarded
as a classic for our subject.<note place='foot'>See § 70
and subsequent sections. Take, for instance, the
sentences:&mdash;<q>Every production of material things and of their forms
must be interpreted as possible in terms of purely mechanical laws,</q>
and the contrast: <q>Some products of material nature cannot be
interpreted as possible in terms of purely mechanical laws.</q></note>
But as far as their
general tendency is concerned, they were already represented
in the nature-philosophies of Democritus on the
one hand, and of Aristotle on the other.
</p>

<p>
All the essential constituents of the modern mechanical
theories are really to be found in Democritus, the
causal interpretation, the denial of any operative
purposes or formative principles, the admission and
assertion of quantitative explanations alone, the denial
of qualities, the reduction of all cosmic developments to
the <q>mechanics of the atom</q> (even to attractions and
repulsions, thus setting aside the <q>energies</q>), the
inevitable necessity of these mechanical sequences, indeed
at bottom even the conviction of the <q>constancy of the
sum of matter and energy.</q> (For, as he says, <q>nothing
comes out of nothing.</q>) And although he makes the
<q>soul</q> the principle of the phenomena of life, that is
in no way contradictory to his general mechanical theory,
but is quite congruent with it. For the <q>soul</q> is to
him only an aggregation of thinner, smoother, and
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
rounder atoms, which as such are more mobile, and can,
as it were, quarter themselves in the body, but nevertheless
stand in a purely mechanical relation to it.
</p>

<p>
Aristotle, who was well aware of the diametrical
opposition, represents, as compared with Democritus, the
Socratic-Platonic teleological interpretation of nature,
and in regard to the question of living organisms his
point of view may quite well be designated by the
modern name of <q>vitalism.</q> Especially in his theory
of the vegetable soul, the essence of vitalism is already
contained. It is the λόγος ἐνυλος (logos enhylos), the
idea immanent in the matter, the conceptual essence of
the organism, or its ideal whole, which is inherent in it
from its beginnings in the germ, and determines, like a
directing law, all its vegetative processes, and so raises
it from a state of <q>possibility</q> to one of <q>reality.</q>
All that we meet with later as <q>nisus formativus,</q> as
<q>life-force</q> (vis vitalis), as <q>endeavour after an end</q>
(Zielstrebigkeit), is included in the scope of Aristotelian
thought. And he has the advantage over many of his
successors of being very much clearer.<note place='foot'><p>To Aristotle
the <q>Soul</q> (ψυχὴ ϕυτική Psyche, phytike) was in the
first place a purely biological principle. But by means of his elastic
formula of Potentiality and Actuality he was able to make the
transition to the psychological with apparent ease. The biological is
to him in <q>potentiality</q> what sensation, impulse, imagination are in
<q>realisation.</q> But the biological and the psychological are not related
to one another as stages. Growth, form, development, &amp;c., cannot
be carried over through any <q>actualisatio</q> into sensation, consciousness
and the like.
</p>
<p>
An essentially different question is, whether the biological may not
be not indeed derivable from the psychological&mdash;that would be the
same mistake&mdash;but dependent on, and conditioned by it, just as we
regard the voluntary moving and directing of the body as dependent
on it. An imaginative interpretation of the world will always take
this course.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
The present state of the problem of life may be
regarded as due to a reaction of biological investigation
and opinion from the <q>vitalistic</q> theories which
prevailed in the first half of last century, and which
were in turn at once the root and the fruit of the
German Nature-philosophy of that time.
</p>

<p>
Lotze in his oft-quoted article, <q>Leben, Lebenskraft</q>
(Life, Vital Force), in Wagner's <q>Hand-Wörterbuch
der Physiologie,</q> 1842, gave the signal for this reaction.
The change, however, did not take place suddenly. The
most important investigators in their special domain,
the physiologist Johannes Müller, the chemist Julius
Liebig, remained faithful to a modified vitalistic standpoint.
But in the following generation the revolution
was complete and energetic. With Du Bois-Reymond,
Virchow, Haeckel, the anti-vitalistic trend became more
definite and more widespread. It had a powerful ally
in the Darwinian theory, which had been promulgated
meanwhile, and at the same time in the increasingly
materialistic tendency of thought, which afforded
support to the mechanical system and also sought
foundations in it.
</p>

<p>
The naturalistic, <q>mechanical</q> interpretation of life
was so much in the tenor of Darwin's doctrine that it
would have arisen out of it if it had not existed before.
It is so generally regarded as a self-evident and necessary
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
corollary of the strictly Darwinian doctrine, that it is
often included with it under the name of Darwinism,
although Darwin personally did not devote any attention
to the problem of the mechanical interpretation of
life. Any estimate of the value of one must be
associated with an estimate of the other also.
</p>

<p>
It goes without saying that the theory of life is
dependent upon, and in a large measure consists of
physico-chemical interpretations, investigations, and
methods. For ever since the attention of investigators
was directed to the problems of growth, of nutrition, of
development and so on, and particularly as knowledge
has passed from primitive and unmethodical forms to
real science, it has been taken as a matter of course that
chemical and physical processes play a large part in life,
and indeed that everything demonstrable, visible, or
analysable, does come about <q>naturally,</q> as it is said.
And from the vitalistic standpoint it has to be asked
whether detailed biological investigation and analysis
can ever accomplish more than the observation and
tracing out of these chemical and physical processes.
Anything beyond this will probably be only the defining
and formulating of the limits of its own proper sphere
of inquiry, and a recognition, though no knowledge, of
what lies beyond and of the co-operative factors. The
difference between vitalism and the mechanical theory
of life is not, that the one regards the processes in the
organism as opposed to those in the inorganic world
while the other identifies them, but that vitalism regards
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
life as a combination of chemical and physical processes,
with the co-operation and under the regulation of other
principles, while the mechanical theory leaves these
other principles out.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding the many noteworthy reactions, we
are bound to regard the present state of the theory of
life as on the whole mechanical. The majority of experts&mdash;not
to speak of the popular materialists, and
especially those who, sailing under the flag of materialistic
interpretation, have their ships full of vitalistic
contraband&mdash;regard as the ideal of their science an
ultimate analysis of the phenomena of life into mechanical
processes, into <q>mechanics of the atom.</q>
They believe in this ideal, and without concealing that
it is still very far off, do not doubt its ultimate attainability,
and regard vitalistic assumptions as obstacles to
the progress of investigation. Moreover, this aspect of
the problem seems likely enough to be permanent with
the majority, or, at any rate, with many naturalists,
though it is obviously one-sided. For it has always
been the task of this line of investigation to extend the
sphere within which physical and chemical laws can be
validly applied in interpreting vital processes, and the
results reached along this line will always be so numerous
and important that even on psychological grounds the
mechanical point of view has the best chance for the
future. Furthermore, the maxim that all the phenomena
of nature must be explained by means of the
simplest factors and according to the smallest possible
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
number of laws, is usually regarded as one of the most
legitimate maxims of science in general, so that the
resolute pertinacity with which many investigators
maintain the entire sufficiency of the mechanical
interpretation, far from being condemned as materialistic
fanaticism, must be respected as the expression
of scientific conscience. Even when confidence
in the one-sided mechanical interpretation of vital processes
sometimes fails in face of the great and striking
riddles of life, it is to be expected that it will revive
again with each new success, great or small.<note place='foot'>Of
course all this still gives us no ground for drawing conclusions
as to the correctness of the mechanistic theory, but only affords
a reason for its power of persistence. Indeed, the very fact that,
in investigating the problem of life, instinct directs us towards
mechanical interpretations, should give added weight to the other
fact, that among the ranks of naturalists themselves there constantly
arise doubts and criticisms of the adequacy of this mode of interpretation,
and that many of them go over more or less completely to
the vitalistic point of view.</note>
</p>

<p>
The mechanical conception of life which now prevails
is made up of the following characteristics and component
elements. These also indicate the lines along
which the arguments are worked out&mdash;lines which
glimmered faintly through the mechanical theories of
ancient times, but which have now been definitely
formulated and supported by evidence.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Conservation of Matter and Energy.</head>

<p>
1. The whole mechanical theory is based upon a law
which is not strictly biological but belongs to science in
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
general&mdash;the law of the conservation of matter and
energy. This was first recognised by Kant as a
general rational concept in his <q>Critique</q> and in the
<q>Grundlegung der Metaphysik der Naturwissenschaft,</q>
and was transferred by Robert Mayer and Helmholtz<note place='foot'>H. Helmholtz,
<q>Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft, eine physikalische
Abhandlung,</q> Berlin, 1847.</note>
to the domain of natural science. Just as no particle
of matter can come from nothing or become nothing,
so no quantum of energy can come from nothing
or become nothing. It must come from somewhere
and must remain somewhere. The form of energy
is continually changing, but the sum of energy in
the universe remains invariable and constant. Therefore,
it seems to follow, there can be no specific vital
phenomena. The energies concerned in the up-building,
growth, and decay of the organism, and the sum of the
functions performed by it, must be the exact resultant
and equivalent of the potential energies stored in its
material substance and the co-operative energies of its
environment. The particular course of transformations
they follow must have its sufficient reason in the configuration
of the parts of the organism, in its relations
to the environment, and the like. An intervention of
<q>vitalistic</q> principles, directions and so forth, would,
we are told, involve a sudden obtrusion and disappearance
again of energy-effects which had no efficient
cause in the previous phenomena. From any point of
view it would be a miracle, and in particular it would
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
be doing violence to the law of the constancy of the
sum of energy.
</p>

<p>
Apart from the inherent general <q>instinct</q>&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>sit
venia verbo</foreign>, for no more definite word is available&mdash;which
is the quiet Socius, the concealed but powerful
spring of the mechanistic convictions, as of most others,
this law of the conservation of energy is probably the
really central argument, and it meets us again more or
less disguised in what follows.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Organic and the Inorganic.</head>

<p>
2. What is on <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> grounds demanded as a
necessity, or set aside as impossible, on the strength of
the axiom of the conservation of energy, must be proved
<hi rend='italic'>à posteriori</hi> by investigation. It must be shown in
detail that the difference between the organic and the
inorganic is only apparent. And it is here that the
mechanical view of life celebrates its greatest triumph.
</p>

<p>
For a long time it seemed as though there were an
absolute difference between <q>inorganic</q> and <q>organic</q>
chemistry, between the chemical processes and products
found in free nature, and those within the <q>living</q>
body. The same elements were indeed found in both,
but it seemed as if they were subject in the living body
to other and higher laws than those observed in inanimate
nature. Out of these elements the organism
builds up, by unexplained processes, peculiar chemical
individualities, highly organised and complex combinations
which are never attained in inorganic nature. This
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
seems to afford indubitable evidence of a vital force
with mysterious super-chemical capacities.
</p>

<p>
But modern chemical science has succeeded in doing
away with this absolute difference between the two
departments of chemistry, for it has achieved, in retorts,
in the laboratory, and with <q>natural</q> chemical means,
what had hitherto only been accomplished by <q>organic</q>
chemistry. Since Wöhler's discovery that urea could be
built up by artificial combination, more and more of
the carbon-compounds which were previously regarded
as specialities of the vital force have been produced by
artificial syntheses. The highest synthesis, that of proteids,
has not yet been discovered, but perhaps that, too,
may yet be achieved.
</p>

<p>
And further: intensive observation through the microscope
and in the laboratory increases the knowledge of
processes which can be analysed into simple chemical
processes, both in the plant and the animal body.
These are astonishing in their diversity and complexity,
but nevertheless they fulfil themselves according to known
chemical laws, and they can be imitated apart from the
living substance. The <q>breaking up</q> of the molecules
of nutritive material,&mdash;that is to say, the preparation of
them as building material for the body,&mdash;does not take
place magically and automatically, but is associated with
definitely demonstrable chemical stuffs, which produce
their effect even outside of the organism. The fundamental
function of living matter&mdash;<q>metabolism,</q>&mdash;that
is, the constant disruption and reconstruction of its own
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
substance, has, it seems, been brought at least nearer
to a possible future explanation by the recognition of
a series of phenomena of a purely chemical nature, the
catalytic phenomena (the effects of ferments or <q>enzymes</q>).
Ingenious hypotheses are already being constructed,
if not to explain, at least to give a general
formulation of these facts, which will serve as a framework
and guiding clue, as a <q>working hypothesis</q> for
the further progress of investigation.
</p>

<p>
The most recent of these hypotheses is that set forth
by Verworn in his book <q>Die Biogenhypothese.</q><note place='foot'>Max
Verworn, <q>Die Biogenhypothese,</q> Jena, 1903. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> criticisms
by Czapek in the <q>Botanische Zeitung,</q> No. 2, 1903, and by Loeb in
the <q>Biologisches Zentralblatt,</q> 1902.</note> He
assumes, as the central vehicle of the vital functions, a
unified living substance, the <q>biogen,</q> nearly related to
the proteids which form the fundamental substance of
protoplasm and of the cell-nucleus, and in contrast to
which the other substances found in the living body are
in part raw materials and reserves, and in part of a derivative
nature, or the results of disruptive metabolism.
Very complex chemically, <q>biogen</q> is able to operate
upon the circulating or reserve <q>nutritive</q> materials in
a way comparable, for instance, to the action of <q>nitric
acid in the production of English sulphuric acid.</q> That
is to say, it is able to set up processes of disruption and of
recombination, apparently by its mere presence, but, in
reality, by its own continual breaking down and building
up again. At the same time it has the power,
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
analogous to that of polymerisation in molecules, of
increasing, of <q>growing.</q>
</p>

<p>
The case is the same in regard to physical laws. They
are identical in the living and the non-living. And
many of the processes of life have already been analysed
into a complex of simpler physical processes. The circulation
of the blood is subject to the same laws of
hydrostatics as are illustrated in all other fluids.
Mechanical, static, and osmotic processes occur in the
organism and constitute its vital phenomena. The eye
is a <foreign rend='italic'>camera obscura</foreign>, an optical apparatus; the ear an
acoustic instrument; the skeleton an ingenious system
of levers, which obey the same laws as all other levers.
E. du Bois-Reymond, in his lectures on <q>The Physics
of Organic Metabolism</q> (<q>Physik des organischen
Stoffwechsels</q>),<note place='foot'>Berlin, 1900. Edited by R. du
Bois-Reymond.</note> compiles a long and detailed list of
the physical factors associated and intertwined in
the most diverse ways with the fundamental phenomenon
of life, namely, metabolism:&mdash;the capacities
and effects of solution, diffusion of liquids, capillarity,
surface tension, coagulation, transfusion with filtration,
the capacities and effects of gases, aero-diffusion through
porous walls, the absorption of gases through solid
bodies and through fluids, and so on.
</p>

<p>
Very impressive, too, are the manifold <q>mechanical</q>
interpretations of intimate vital characteristics, such
as the infinitely fine structure of protoplasm. For
protoplasm does not fill the cell as a compact
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
mass, but spreads itself out and builds itself up in
the most delicate network or meshwork, of which it
forms the threads and walls, enclosing innumerable
vacuoles and alveoli, and Bütschli succeeded in making
a surprisingly good imitation of this <q>structure</q> by
mechanical means. Drops of oil intimately mixed
with potash and placed between glass plates formed
a very similar emulsion-like or foam-like structure with
a visible network and with enclosed alveoli.<note place='foot'>Bütschli,
<q>Untersuchungen über microscopische Schäume und
das Protoplasma,</q> Leipzig, 1892. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Berthold, <q>Studien zur
Protoplasmamechanik.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Rhumbler, too, succeeded in explaining by <q>developmental
mechanics</q> some of the apparently extremely
subtle processes at the beginning of embryonic development
(the invagination of the blastula to form the
gastrula); by imitating the sphere of cells which compose
the blastula with elastic steel bands he deduced the
invagination mechanically from the model.<note place='foot'>Rhumbler,
<q>Zur Mechanik des Gastrulationvorganges ...</q> in
<q>Archiv. f. Entwicklungsmechanik,</q> Bd. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here, too, must be mentioned Verworn's attempts to
explain <q>the movements of the living substance.</q><note place='foot'><q>Bewegung
der lebendigen Substanz.</q> Jena, 1892.</note>
<q>Kinesis,</q> the power to move, has since the time of
Aristotle been regarded as one of the peculiar characteristics
of life. From the gliding <q>amœboid</q> movements
of the moneron, with its mysterious power of
shifting its position, spreading itself out, and spinning
out long threads (<q>pseudopodia</q>), up to the contractility
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
of the muscle-fibre, the same riddle reappears in
many different forms. Verworn attacks it at the lowest
level, and attempts to solve it by reference to the
surface tension to which all fluid bodies are subject,
and to the partial relaxation of this, which forces the
mass to give off radiating processes or <q>pseudopodia.</q>
The mechanical causes of the suspension of the surface
tension are inquired into, and striking examples of
pseudopod-like rays are found in the inorganic world,
for instance, in a drop of oil. Thus a starting-point is
discovered for mechanical interpretations at a higher
level.<note place='foot'>A short, very attractive description of these mechanical methods,
and one which appeals particularly to us laymen because of its
excellent illustrations, is Dreyer's <q>Ziele und Wege biologischer
Forschung</q> (Jena, 1892), especially the first part, <q>Die Flüssigkeitsmechanik
als eine Grundlage der organischen Form- und
Gerüst-Bildung.</q> The astonishing and fascinating forms of Radiolarian
frameworks and <q>skeletons</q> (the artistic appreciation of
which was made possible to a wider public by Haeckel's <q>Kunstformen
der Natur</q>) are here made the subject of mechanical
explanations, which are certainly in a high degree plausible.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Irritability.</head>

<p>
3. A property which seems to be quite peculiar to
living matter is irritability, or the power of responding
to <q>stimuli,</q> that is to say, of reacting to some
influence from without in such a manner that <emph>the reaction</emph>
is not the mere equivalent of the action, but that
the stimulus is to the organism as a contingent cause or
impulse setting up a new process or a new series of
processes, which seem as though they occurred spontaneously
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
and freely. Thus the sensitive plant <hi rend='italic'>Mimosa
pudica</hi> droops its feathery leaves when touched. Here,
too, must be classed also all the innumerable phenomena
of Heliotropism, Geotropism, Rheotropism, Chemotropism,
and other tropisms, in which the sun, or the earth, or
currents, or chemical stimuli so affect a form of life&mdash;plant,
alga, or spore&mdash;that it disposes its own movements
or the arrangements of its parts accordingly, turning
towards, or away from, or in an oblique direction
to the source of stimulus, or otherwise behaving in some
definite manner which could not have been deduced or
predicted from the direct effects of the stimulating
factors. The upholders of the mechanical theory have
attempted to conquer this vast and mysterious domain
of facts by seeking to do away with the appearance of
spontaneity and freedom, by demonstrating in suitable
cases that these phenomena of spontaneity and the like
would be impossible were it not that the potential
energies previously stored up within the organism are
liberated by the stimulus. Thus the effect caused is
not equivalent to the stimulus alone, but is rather the
resultant of the conditions given in the chemo-physical
predispositions of the organism itself, and in the
architecture of its parts, <emph>plus</emph> the stimulus.
</p>

<p>
Directly associated with this property of irritability
is another form of spontaneity and freedom in
living beings&mdash;the power of adapting themselves to
changed conditions of existence. Some do not show
this at all, while others show it in an astonishing degree,
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
helping themselves out by new contrivances, so to
speak. Thus the organism may protect itself against
temperature and other influences, against injury, making
damages good again by self-repairing processes,
<q>regenerating</q> lost organs, and sometimes even
building up the whole organism anew from amputated
parts. The mechanical interpretation must here proceed
in the same way as in dealing with the question
of stimuli, applying to the development of form the same
explanations as are there employed. And just because
this domain does not lend itself readily to mechanical
explanation, we can understand that confidence in the
sufficiency of this mode of interpretation grows rapidly
with each fresh conquest, when this or that particular
process is shown to be actually explicable on mechanical
principles. Processes of development or morphogenesis&mdash;which
are among the most intricate and difficult&mdash;are
attacked in various ways. The processes of regeneration,
for instance, are compared with the similar tendencies
observed in crystals, which when they are injured have
the capacity of restoring their normal form. This
capacity therefore obtains in the realm of the inorganic
as well as among organisms, and is referred to the
tendency of all substances to maintain a definite state of
equilibrium, conditioned by their form, and, if that is
disturbed, to return to a similar or a new state of
equilibrium. Or, the procedure may be to reduce the
processes of a developmental or morphogenetic category
to processes of stimulation in general, and then
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
it is believed, or even demonstrated, that chemo-physical
analogies or explanations can be found for them.
</p>

<p>
Thus, for instance, it is shown that the egg of the
sea-urchin may be <q>stimulated</q> to development, not
exclusively by the fertilising sperm, but even by a simple
chemical agent, or that spermatozoids which are
seeking the ovum to be fertilised may be attracted by
malic acid. These are <q>reductions</q> of the higher
phenomena of life to the terms of a lower and simpler
process of <q>stimulus,</q> that is to say, to chemotropism
in the second case and something analogous in the first.
A further reduction would be to show that the movement
of the spermatozoids towards the malic acid is not
a <q>vitalistic</q> act, much less a psychically conditioned one,
(that is, conditioned by <q>taste,</q> <q>sensation,</q> and the
voluntary or instinctive impulse liberated thereby), but
is a chemo-physical process, although perhaps an
exceedingly complex one. It would be another
<q>reduction</q> of this second kind, if, for instance, the
well-known effect of light on plants, which makes them
turn their leaves towards it (heliotropism), could be
shown to be due to more rapid growth of the leaf on
the shaded side, which would lift up the leaf and cause
it to turn, or to an increase of turgescence on the shaded
side, and if it could be shown that the increase in either
case was a simple and obvious physical process, the
necessary consequence of the decreased amount of light.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious, and it is also thoroughly justifiable, that
all attempts along these lines of interpretation should
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
be undertaken in the first place in connection with the
simplest and lowest forms of life. It is in the investigation
of the <q>Protists,</q> the study of the vital
phenomena of the microscopically minute unicellular
organisms, that attempts of this kind have been most
frequently made. And they follow the course we have
just indicated; the <q>apparently</q> vitalistic and psychical
behaviour of unicellulars (impulse, will, spontaneous
movement, selecting and experimenting) is interpreted
in terms of reflex processes and the <q>irritability</q> of
the cell, and these again are traced back, like all
stimulus-processes, to the subtle mechanics of the
atoms.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Spontaneous Generation.</head>

<p>
4. This reduction of known biological phenomena to
simpler terms, the lessening of the gap between inorganic
and organic chemistry, and the formulation of the
doctrine of the conservation of energy, have all prepared
the way for a fourth step, the establishment of the
inevitable theory of <foreign rend='italic'>generatio spontanea sive equivoca</foreign>,
the spontaneous generation of the living, that is to say,
the gradual evolution of the living from the not living.
Since the earth, and with it the conditions under which
alone life is possible, have had a beginning in time,
life upon the earth must also have had a beginning.
The assumption that the first living organisms may
have come to the earth on meteorites simply shifts the
problem a step farther back, for according to all current
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
theories of the universe, if there are in any of the
heavenly bodies conditions admitting of the presence of
life, these conditions have arisen from others in which
life was impossible. Therefore, since this suggestion is
on the face of it a mere evasion of the difficulty, the
theory of spontaneous generation naturally arose. There
is something almost comical in the change in the
attitude of the natural sciences to this theory. For
centuries it was one of the beliefs of popular superstition,
with its naïve way of regarding nature, that earthworms
<q>developed</q> from damp soil, and vermin from shavings,
and in general that the living arose from the non-living.
On the other hand it was one of the characteristics and
axioms of scientific thought to reject this naïve <foreign rend='italic'>generatio
equivoca</foreign>, and to hold fast to the proposition, <foreign rend='italic'>omne
vivum ex ovo</foreign>, or, at least, <foreign rend='italic'>omne vivum ex
vivo</foreign>. And it was regarded as one of the triumphs of modern science
when, about the middle of the last century, Pasteur
gave definiteness to this doctrine, and when through
him, through Virchow, and indeed the whole younger
generation of naturalists, the proposition was modified,
on the basis of the newly discovered cell-theory, to
<foreign rend='italic'>omnis cellula ex cellula</foreign>. But a short time after
Pasteur's discoveries, the ideas of Darwinism and the theory of
evolution gained widespread acceptance. And now it
appeared that, in rejecting the theory of <foreign rend='italic'>generatio
equivoca</foreign>, naturalists had, so to speak, sawn off the
branch on which they desired to sit, and thus
many, like Haeckel, became enthusiastic converts to
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
the theory which natural science had previously rejected.
</p>

<p>
Constructing theories and speculations as to the
possibilities of spontaneous generation is regarded by
some naturalists as somewhat gratuitous (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Du Bois-Reymond).
In general, it is regarded as sufficient to
point out that the reduction of the phenomena of life as
we know them to those of a simpler order, and the
unification of organic and inorganic chemistry, have
made the problem of the first origin of life essentially
simpler, and that the law of the constancy and identity of
energy throughout the universe permits no other theory.
But others go more determinedly to work, and attempt
to give concrete illustrations of the problem. The
most elementary form of life known to us is the cell.
From cells and their combinations, their products and
secretions, all organisms, plant and animal alike, are
built up. If we succeed in deriving the cell, the
derivation of the whole world of life seems, with the
help of the doctrine of descent, a comparatively simple
matter. The cell itself seems to stand nearer to the
inorganic, and to be less absolutely apart from the
inanimate world than a highly organised body,
differentiated as to its functions and organs, such as a
mammal. It almost seems as if we might regard the
lowest forms of life known to us, which seem little
more than aggregated homogeneous masses of flowing
rather than creeping protoplasm, as an intermediate
link between the higher forms of life and the non-living.
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
But the theory does not begin with the cell;
it assumes a series of connecting-links (which may of
course be as long and as complicated as the series from
the cell upwards to man) between the cell and matter
which is still quite <q>inorganic</q> and which is capable
only of the everyday chemical and physical phenomena,
and not of the higher syntheses of these, which in their
increasing complexity and diversity ultimately come to
represent <q>life</q> in its most primitive forms. As
proteid is the chief constituent of protoplasm, it is
regarded as the specific physical basis of life, and life is
looked upon as the sum of its functions. And it is
not doubted that, if the conditions of the universe
brought about a natural combination of carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen and oxygen in certain proportions, so
that proteid resulted, the transition to proteid which
forms itself and renews itself from the surrounding
elements, to assimilating, growing, dividing proteid,
and ultimately to the most primitive plasmic structure,
to non-nucleated, nucleated, and finally fully formed
cells, could also come about.
</p>

<p>
Haeckel's demonstration of the possibility of spontaneous
generation is along these lines. He refers to
the cytodes, the blood corpuscles, to alleged or actual
non-nucleated cells, to bacteria, to the simplest forms
of cell-structure, as proofs of the possibility of a
descending series of connecting-links. He (and with
him Nägeli) calls these links, below the level of the cell,
Probia or Probions, and for a time he believed that he
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
had discovered in <hi rend='italic'>Bathybius Haeckeli</hi> presently existing
homogeneous living masses, without cell division, nucleus
or structure, the <q>primitive slime</q> which apparently
existed in the abysmal depths of the ocean to this day.
Unfortunately, this primitive slime soon proved itself
an illusion.
</p>

<p>
Opinions differ as to whether spontaneous generation
took place only in the beginning of evolution, or
whether it occurred repeatedly and is still going on.
Most naturalists incline to the former idea; Nägeli
champions the latter. There are also differences of
opinion as to whether the origin of life from the non-living
was manifold, and took place at many different
places on the earth, or whether all the forms of life
now in existence have arisen from a common source
(monophyletic and polyphyletic theories).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Mechanics of Development.</head>

<p>
5. The minds of the supporters of the mechanical
theory had still to move along a fifth line in order to
solve the riddle of the development of the living
individual from the egg, or of the germ to its finished
form, the riddle of morphogenesis. They cannot
assume the existence of <q>the whole</q> before the part,
or equip it with the idea of the thing as a <foreign rend='italic'>spiritus
rector</foreign>, playing the part of a metaphysical controlling
agency. Here as elsewhere they must demonstrate the
existence of purely mechanical principles. It is simply
from the potential energies inherent in its constituent
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
parts that the supply of energy must flow, by means of
which the germ is able to make use of inorganic
material from without, to assimilate it and increase its
own substance, and, by using it up, to maintain and
increase its power of work, to break up the carbonic
acid of the atmosphere and to gain the carbon which is
so important for its vital functions, to institute and
organise the innumerable chemico-physical processes by
means of which its form is built up. Purely as a
consequence of the chemico-physical nature of the
germ, of the properties of the substances included in it
on the one hand, and of the implicit structure and
configuration of its parts, down to the intrinsic specific
undulatory rhythm of its molecules, it must follow
that its mass grows exactly as it does, and not otherwise,
that it behaves as it does and not otherwise,
duplicating itself by division after division, and by
intricate changes arranging and rearranging the results
of division until the embryo or larva, and finally the
complete organism, is formed.
</p>

<p>
An extraordinary amount of ingenuity has been expended
in this connection, in order to avoid here, where
perhaps it is most difficult of all, the use of <q>teleological</q>
principles, and to remain faithful to the orthodox,
exclusively mechanical mode of interpretation. To
this category belong Darwin's gemmules, Haeckel's
plastidules, Nägeli's micellæ, Weismann's labyrinth of ids,
determinants, and biophors within the germ-plasm, and
Roux's ingenious hypothesis of the struggle of parts,
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
which is an attempt to apply the Darwinian principle
within the organism in order here also to rebut the teleological interpretation by
giving a scientific one.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Roux,
<q>Archiv. fur Entwicklungsmechanik.</q> The name
sufficiently indicates the scope.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Heredity.</head>

<p>
6. With this fifth line of thought a sixth is associated
and intertwined. The problem of development is
closely bound up with that of <q>heredity.</q> A developing
organism follows the parental type. The acorn in
its growth follows the type of the parent oak, repeating
all its morphological and physiological characters down
to the most intimate detail. And the animal organism
adds to this also the whole psychical equipment, the
instincts, the capacities of will and consciousness which
distinguish its parents. The problems of the fifth and
sixth order are closely inter-related, the sixth problem
being in reality the same as the fifth, only in greater
complexity.
</p>

<p>
A step towards the mechanical solution of this
problem was indicated in the <q>preformation theory</q>
advanced by Leibnitz, and elaborated by Bonnet.
According to this theory the developing organism is
enclosed in the minutest possible form within the egg,
and is thus included in the parental organism, in
miniature indeed, but quite complete. Thus the problem
of the <q>development of form</q> or of <q>heredity</q>
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
was, so to speak, ruled out of court; all that was
assumed was continuous growth and self-unfolding.
</p>

<p>
Opposed to this theory was one of later growth,
the theory of epigenesis, which maintained that the
organism developed without preformation from the still
undifferentiated and homogeneous substance of the egg.
The supporters of the first theory considered themselves
much more scientific and exact than those of
the second. And not without reason. For the theory
of epigenesis obviously required mysterious formative
principles, and equally mysterious powers of recollection
and recapitulation, which impelled the undifferentiated
ovum substance into the final form, precisely like
that of its ancestors. Nor need the preformationists
have greatly feared the reproach, that the parental
organism must have been included within the grand-parental,
and so on backwards to the first parents in
Paradise. For this <q>Chinese box</q> encapsulement
theory only requires that we should grant the idea of the
infinitely little, and that idea is already an integral
part of our thinking.
</p>

<p>
Modern biologists ridicule the preformation hypothesis
as altogether too artificial. And undoubtedly it
founders on the facts of embryology, which disclose
nothing to suggest the unfolding of a pre-existent
miniature model, but show us how the egg-cell divides
into two, into four, and so on, with continued multiplication
followed by varied arrangements and rearrangements
of cells&mdash;in short, all the complex changes which
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
constitute development. But a preformation in some
sense or other there must be;&mdash;some peculiar material
predisposition of the germ, which, as such, supplies the
directing principle for the development, and the sufficient
reason for the repetition of the parental form.
This is of such obvious importance from the mechanical
point of view that the speculations of to-day tend to
move along the old preformationist lines. To these
modern preformationists are opposed the modern upholders
of epigenesis or gradual differentiation, who
attempt to elaborate a mechanical theory of development.
And with the contrast between these two schools
there is necessarily associated the discussion as to the
inheritance or non-inheritance of acquired characters.
</p>

<p>
Darwin's contribution to the problem of the sixth
order was his rather vague theory of <q>Pangenesis.</q>
The living organism, according to him, forms in its
various organs, parts, and cells exceedingly minute
particles of living matter (gemmules), which, <q>in some
way or other,</q> bear within them the special characteristics
of the part in which they are produced. These
may wander through the organism and meet in the
germ-plasm, and then, when a child-organism is produced,
they <q>swarm,</q> so to speak, in it again <q>in some
way or other,</q> and in some fashion control the development.
This gemmule-theory was too obviously a <foreign rend='italic'>quid
pro quo</foreign> to hold its ground for long. Various theories
were elaborated, and the world of the invisibly minute
was flooded with speculations.
</p>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<p>
The most subtle of these, on the side of consistent
Darwinism, is that of Weismann, a pronounced
preformation theory which has been increasingly refined
and elaborated in the course of years of reflection.
According to Weismann, the individual parts and
characteristics of the organism are represented in the
germ-plasm, not in finished form, but as <q>determinants</q>
in a definite system which is itself the directing
principle in the building up of the bodily system, and
with definite characteristics, which determine the
peculiarities of the individual organs and parts, down to
scales, hairs, skin-spots, and birth-marks. As the germ-cells
have the power of growth, and can increase
endlessly by dividing and re-dividing, and as each
process of division takes place in such a way that each
half (each product of division) maintains the previous
system, there arise innumerable germ-cells corresponding
to one another, from which, therefore, corresponding
bodies must arise (inheritance). It is not in reality the
newly developed bodies which give rise to new germ-cells
and transfer to them something of their own characters;
the germ-cells of the child-organism develop
from that of the parent (<q>immortality</q> of the germ-cells).
Therefore there can be no inheritance of acquired
characters, and no modifications of type through external
causes; and all variations which appear in a series of
generations are due solely to internal variations in the
germ-cells, whether brought about by the complication
of their system through the fusion of the male and
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
female germ-cells, or through differences in the growth of
the individual determinants themselves. The numerous
subsidiary theses interwoven in Weismann's theory are
entirely coherent, and have been thought out to their
conclusions with praiseworthy determination.<note place='foot'>For
a discussion of the difficulties and impossibilities of this
theory see page <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> above.</note> To the
theory as a whole, because of its fundamental conception
of preformation, and to its subsidiary hypotheses, piece
by piece, there has been energetic opposition on the
part of the upholders of the modern mechanical theory
of epigenesis. This opposition is most concretely and
comprehensively expressed in Haacke's <q>Gestaltung und
Vererbung.</q> The infinitely complex intricacy of Weismann's
minute microcosm within the germ-cell, indeed
within every id in it, is justly described as a mere
duplication, a repetition in the infinitely little of the
essential difficulties to be explained. The complicated
processes of developing in the growing and inheriting
organism cannot be explained, they say, in terms of
processes of the equally complex and likewise developing
germ-plasm. The complex, if it is to be explained at
all, must be explained by the simple&mdash;in this case by
the functions of a homogeneous uniform plasm.
</p>

<p>
At an earlier date Haeckel had made an attempt in
this direction in his theory of the <q>perigenesis of the
plastidules.</q> Peculiar states of oscillation and rhythm
in the molecules of the germ-substance, handed on to it
from the parent organism and transferable to all the
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
assimilated matter of the offspring, represent, according
to this theory, the principle which impels development
to follow a particular course corresponding
to the type of the parents. This was a <emph>physical</emph> way
of interpreting the matter. Other investigators have
given a <emph>chemical</emph> expression to their theoretical schemes
for explaining heredity.
</p>

<p>
Haacke declares both these to be unsatisfactory, and
replaces them by morphological formative principles.
It is the <emph>structure</emph> of the otherwise homogeneous living
matter that explains morphogenesis and inheritance.
Minute <q>gemmæ,</q> homogeneous fundamental particles
of living substance, not to be compared to or confused
with Darwin's <q>gemmules,</q> are aggregated in <q>Gemmaria,</q>
whose configuration, stability, symmetrical or
asymmetrical structure, and so on, are determined by
the relative positions of the gemmæ to each other, and
these in their turn control the organism and give it a
corresponding symmetrical or asymmetrical, a firmly
or loosely aggregated structure. The completed organism
then forms a system in organic equilibrium, which
is constantly exposed to variations and influences due
to external causes (St. Hilaire), and to use and disuse
of organs (Lamarck). These influences affect the structure
of the gemmaria, and as the germ-cells consist
of gemmaria, like those of the rest of the organism,
the possibility of the transmission of acquired new
characters is self-evident. The importance of correlated
growth and orthogenesis is explained on a similar
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
basis, and the Darwinian conceptions of the independent
variation of individual parts, of the exclusive dominance
of utility, of the influence of the struggle for existence
in regard to individual selection, and of the omnipotence
of natural selection, are energetically denied.
</p>

<p>
Oscar Hertwig,<note place='foot'><q>Preformation oder Epigenesis?</q> Outlines of a
theory of the development of organisms. Jena, 1894. (Part I. of <q>Zeit- und Streit-fragen
der Biologie.</q>) Translated by P. Chalmers Mitchell, <q>The
Biological Problem of To-day.</q></note> de Vries, Driesch<note place='foot'>In
his earlier period. Later he rejects both preformation and
epigenesis, as mechanical distortions of vital processes.</note> and others
attempt to reconcile the preformationist and the epigenetic
standpoints, and <q>to extract what is good and
usable out of both.</q> Hertwig and Driesch, however,
can only be mentioned with reservations in this connection.
</p>

<p>
We cannot better sum up the whole tendency of the
construction of mechanical theories on these last lines
than in the words of Schwann: <q>There is within the
organism no fundamental force working according to
a definite idea; it arises in obedience to the blind laws
of necessity.</q>
</p>

<p>
So much for the different lines followed by the
mechanical theories of to-day. An idea of their general
tenor can be gained from a series of much quoted
general treatises, of which we must mention at least
the <q>classics.</q> In Wagner's <q>Handwörterbuch der
Physiologie,</q> 1842, Vol. I., Lotze wrote a long introductory
article to the whole work, on <q>Life and Vital
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
Force.</q> It was the challenge of the newer views to the
previously vitalistic standpoint, and at the same time
it was based on Lotze's general principles and interspersed
with philosophical criticism of the concepts of
force, cause, effect, law, &amp;c.<note place='foot'>See also
Lotze's interesting article <q>Instinct</q> in the same work.</note>
A similar train of ideas
to Lotze's is followed to-day by O. Hertwig, especially
in his <q>Mechanismus und Biologie.</q><note place='foot'>Part II. of
his <q>Zeit- und Streit-fragen der Biologie.</q></note> Lighter and
more elegant was the polemic against vital force, and
the outline of a mechanical theory which Du Bois-Reymond
prefaced to his great work, <q>Untersuchungen
über die tierische Electricität</q> (1849). It did not go
nearly so deep as Lotze's essay, but perhaps for that
very reason its phrases and epigrams soon became
common property. We may recall how he speaks of
vital force as a <q>general servant for everybody,</q> of the
iron atom which remains the same whether it be in the
meteorite in cosmic space, in the wheel of the railway
carriage, or in the blood of the thinker, and of analytic
mechanics which may be applied even to the problem of
personal freedom.
</p>

<p>
The most comprehensive and detailed elaboration of
the mechanical theory of life is to be found in Herbert
Spencer's <q>Principles of Biology.</q><note place='foot'>Second Edition,
1902.</note> Friedrich Albert
Lange's <q>History of Materialism</q> is a brilliant plea for
mechanical theories,<note place='foot'>In Vol. II. p. 139. 1898.</note>
which he afterwards surpassed and
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
neutralised by his Kantian Criticism. Verworn, too, in his
<q>Physiology</q><note place='foot'><q>General Physiology.</q>
Translated by Lee. London. 1899.
P. 170.</note> gives a clear example of the way in which
the mechanical theory in its most consistent form is
sublimed, apparently in the idealism of Kant and Fichte,
but in reality in its opposite&mdash;the Berkeleyan psychology.
A similar outcome is in various ways indicated
in the modern trend of things.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. Criticism Of Mechanical Theories.</head>

<p>
In attempting to define our attitude to the mechanical
theory of life, we have first of all to make sure that we
have a right to take up a definite position at all. We
should have less right, or perhaps none, if this theory of
life were really of a purely <q>biological</q> nature, built
up entirely from the expert knowledge and data which
the biologist alone possesses. But the principles, assumptions,
supplementary ideas and modes of expression
along all the six lines we have discussed, the style and
method according to which the hypothesis is constructed,
the multitude of separate presuppositions
with which it works, and indeed everything that helps
to build up and knit the biological details into a scientific
hypothesis, are the materials of rational synthesis
in general, and as such are subject to general as well
as to biological criticism. What is there, for instance,
in Weismann's ingenious biophor-theory that can be
called specifically biological, and not borrowed from
other parts of the scientific system?
</p>

<p>
One advantage, indeed, the biologist always has in
this matter, apart from his special knowledge; that is,
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
the technical instinct, the power of scenting out, so to
speak, and immediately feeling the importance of the
facts pertaining to his own discipline. It is this that
gives every specialist the advantage over the layman in
dealing with the data of his own subject. This power
of instinctively appraising facts, which develops in the
course of all special work, can, for instance in hypotheses
in the domain of history, transform small details, which
to the layman seem trivial, into weighty arguments.
Similarly it may be that the success of the mechanical
interpretation in regard to isolated processes may make
its validity for many other allied processes certain, even
though there is no precise proof of this. But we
cannot regard this as a final demonstration of the
applicability of the mechanical theory, since the same
technical instinct in other experts leads them to reject
the whole hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
But here we are met with something surprising. May
it not be that while we are impelled on general grounds
to contend against the mechanical interpretation of vital
phenomena, we are not so impelled on <emph>religious</emph> grounds?
May it not be that the instinct of the religious consciousness
is misleading when it impels us&mdash;as probably
every one will be able to certify from his own experience&mdash;to
rebel against this mechanisation of life, the
mechanical solution of its mysteries? Lotze, the
energetic antagonist of <q>vital force,</q> the founder of
the mechanical theory of vital processes, was himself a
theist, and was so far from recognising any contradiction
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
between the mechanical point of view and the Christian
belief in God, that he included the former without
ceremony in his theistic philosophical speculations.
His view has become that of many theologians, and is
often expressed in a definition of the boundaries between
theology and natural science. According to the idea
which was formulated by Lotze, and developed by
others along his lines, the matter is quite simple. The
interest which religion has in the processes of nature is
at once and exclusively to be found in teleology. Are
there purposes, plans, and ideas which govern and give
meaning to the whole? The interest of natural science
is purely in recognising inviolable causality; every
phenomenon must have its compelling and sufficient
reason in the system of causes preceding it. All that
is and happens is absolutely determined by its causes,
and nothing, no <foreign rend='italic'>causæ finales</foreign>
for instance, can co-operate
with these causes in determining the result.
But, as Lotze says, and as we have repeatedly pointed
out, causal explanation does not exclude a consideration
from the point of view of purpose, and the mechanical
interpretation does not do so either. For this is nothing
more than the causal explanation itself, only carried to
complete consistency and definiteness. Purposes and
ideas are not efficient causes but results. Where, for
instance, there is a controlled purposive occurrence, the
<q>purpose</q> nowhere appears as a factor co-operating
with the series of causes, for these follow according to
strict law, and the <q>purpose</q> reveals itself at the close
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
of the series, as the result of a closed causal nexus,
complete in itself, always provided that the initial links
in the chain have been accurately estimated. The same
is true of the processes of life. They are the ultimate
result, strictly necessary and sufficiently accounted for
in terms of mechanical sequence, of a long chain of
causes whose initial links imply a definite constitution
which could not be further reduced. Whether this
ultimate result is merely a result or whether it is also a
<q>purpose</q> is a question which, as we have seen twice
already, it is wholly beyond the power of the causal
mode of interpretation to answer. Given that an
infinite intelligence in the world wished to realise
purposes without instituting them as directly accomplished,
but by letting them express themselves through
a gradual <q>becoming,</q> the method would be exactly
what is shown in the mechanical theory of life, that is,
the primitive data and starting-points would have
inherent in them a peculiar constitution and a rigidly
inexorable orderliness of causal sequence. And Lotze
emphasises that it would also be worthier of God
to achieve the greatest by means of the simplest, and to
work out the realisation of His eternal purposes according
to the strict inevitableness of mechanism, than to
attain His ends through the complicated means, the
adventitious aids, and all the irregularities implied
in the incommensurable activities of a <q>vital force.</q>
(<q>God needs no minor gods.</q>)
</p>

<p>
To Lotze himself these original data and starting
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
points are the primitive forms of life, which, according
to his view, are directly <q>given,</q> and cannot be referred
back to anything else (except to <q>creation</q>). But it
is obvious that his view can be enlarged and extended
so as to refer the derivation of the whole animate world
to the original raw materials of the cosmos (energy,
matter, or whatsoever they may be), and to the orderly
process by which these materials were combined in
various configurations to form the chemical elements,
the chemical compounds, living proteids, the first cell,
and the whole series of higher forms. If this nexus has
taken place, it is nothing else than the transformation
of the <q>potential</q> into the <q>actual</q> through strict
causality. And if this actuality proves itself to have
claims, because of its own intrinsic worth, to be considered
as intelligent <q>purpose,</q> the whole system of
means, including the starting-point, can be recognised
as the means to an end, and the original wisdom and
the intelligence which ordained the purpose is only
glorified the more through the great simplicity, the
rational comprehensibility, and the inexorable necessity
of the system, which excludes all chance, and therewith
all possibility of error.
</p>

<p>
This extension of Lotze's reconciliation of the
mechanical causal with the teleological point of view
is impressive and, as far as it goes, also quite convincing.
It will never be given up, even if the point of
view should change somewhat. And we have already
seen that it is quite sufficient as long as we are dealing
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
only with the question of teleology. But we must ask
whether religion will be satisfied with <q>teleology</q>
alone, or whether this is even the first requirement
that it makes in regard to natural phenomena. We
have already asked the question and attempted to clear
the ground for an answer. Let us try to make it more
definite.
</p>

<p>
Many people will have a certain uneasiness in regard
to the Lotzian ideas; they will be unable to rid themselves
of a feeling that this way of looking at things
is only a <foreign rend='italic'>pis aller</foreign> for the religious point of view, and
that the fundamental requirements of religious feeling
receive very inadequate satisfaction on this method.
The world of life which has arisen thus is altogether
too rational and transparent. It is calculable and
mathematical. It satisfies well enough the need for
teleology, and with that the need for a supreme,
universally powerful and free intelligence; but it gives
neither support nor nourishment to the essential
element in religious feeling, through which alone faith
becomes in the strict sense religious. Religion, even
Christian religion, is, so to speak, a stratified structure,
a graduated pyramid, expressing itself, at its second
(and undoubtedly higher) level, in our recognition of
purpose, the rationality of the world, our own spiritual
and personal being and worth, but implying at its
basis an inward sense of the mysterious, a joy in that
which is incommensurable and unspeakable, which fills
us with awe and devotion. And religion at the second
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
stage must not sweep away the essence of the stage
below, but must include it, at the same time informing
it with new significance. Whoever does not possess his
religion in this way will agree with, and will be quite
satisfied with the Lotzian standpoint. But to any one
who has experience of the most characteristic element
in religion, it will be obvious that there must be a
vague but deep-rooted antipathy between religion and
the mathematical-mechanical conception of things.
Evidence of the truth of this is to be found in the
instinctive perceptions and valuations which mark even
the naïve expressions of the religious consciousness.<note place='foot'>As
a remarkable instance and corroboration of this, we may
refer to the ever-recurring, instinctive antipathy of deeply religious
temperaments, from Augustine to Luther and Schleiermacher, to the
Aristotelian mood and its conception of the world, and their sympathy
with Plato's (mostly and especially in their <q>Platonised</q>
expressions). The clear-cut, luminous, conception of the world
which expresses everything in terms of commensurable concepts is
thoroughly Aristotelian. But it would be difficult to find a place in
it for the peculiar element which lies at the root of all true devotional
feeling, and which makes faith something more than the highest
<q>reverence, love and trust.</q></note>
For it is in full sympathy with a world which is riddled
with what is inconceivable and incommensurable, in full
sympathy with every evidence of the existence of such
an element in the world of nature and mind, and therefore
with every proof that the merely mechanical theory
has its limits, that it does not suffice, and that its very
insufficiency is a proof that the world is and remains in
its depths mysterious. Now we have already said that
the true sphere for such feeling is not the outer court
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
of nature, but within the realm of the emotional life
and of history, and, on the other hand, that even if
the attempt to trace life back to the simpler forces of
nature were successful, we should still be confronted
with the riddle of the sphinx. But any one who would
say frankly what he felt would at once be obliged to
admit that the religious sense is very strongly stirred
by the mystery of vital phenomena, and that in
losing this he would lose a domain very dear to him.
These sympathies and antipathies are in themselves
sufficient to give an interest to the question of the
insufficiency of the mechanical view of things.
</p>

<p>
For it is by no means the case that the mechanical
theory, with its premisses and principles, is the interpretation
that best fits the facts, and that most
naturally arises out of a calm consideration of the
animate world. It is an artificial scheme, and astonishing
energy has been expended on the attempt to fit it
to the actual world, that it may make this orderly and
translucent. It certainly yields this service so far, but
not without often becoming a kind of strait-jacket, and
revealing itself as an artificiality. In so far as the
special problems of biology are concerned, we shall
afterwards follow our previous method of taking our
orientation from those specialists in the subject who,
in reaction from the one-sidedness of the mechanical
doctrine, have founded the <q>neo-vitalism</q> of to-day.
Here we are only concerned with the generalities and
presuppositions of the theory.
</p>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<p>
We must dispute even the main justification of the
theory, which is sought for in the old maxim of parsimony
in the use of principles of explanation (<foreign rend='italic'>entia</foreign>, and
also <foreign rend='italic'>principia, præter necessitatem non esse
multiplicanda</foreign>), and in Kant's <q>regulative principle,</q> that
science must proceed as if everything could ultimately
be explained in terms of mechanism. For surely our
task is to try to explain things, not at any cost with the
fewest possible principles, but rather with the aid of
those principles which appear most correct. If nature
is not fundamentally simple, then it is not scientific but
unscientific to simplify it theoretically. And the proposition
bracketed above has its obvious converse side,
that while entities and principles must not be multiplied
except when it is necessary, on the other hand
their number must not be arbitrarily lessened. To
proceed according to the fundamental maxims of the
mechanistic view can only be wholesome for a time and,
so to speak, for pædagogical reasons. To apply them
seriously and permanently would be highly injurious,
for, by prejudging what is discoverable in nature, it
would tend to prevent the calm, objective study of things
which asks for nothing more than to see them as they are.
It would thus destroy the fineness of our appreciation
of what there really is in nature. This is true alike of
forcible attempts to reduce the processes of life to
mechanical processes, and of the Darwinian doctrine of
the universal dominance of utility. Both bear unmistakably
the stamp of foregone conclusions, and betray
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
a desire for the simplest, rather than for the most
correct principles of interpretation.
</p>

<p>
There is one point which presses itself on the notice
even of outsiders, and is probably realised even more
keenly by specialists. The confidence of the supporters
of the mechanical theories of earlier days, from
Descartes onward, that animals and the bodies of men
were machines, mechanical automata, down to the
mechanical theories of Lamettrie and Holbach, of
<foreign rend='italic'>l'homme machine</foreign>,
and of the <foreign rend='italic'>système de la nature</foreign>, was at
least as great as, probably greater than, that of the supporters
of the modern theories. Yet how naïve and
presumptuous seem the crude and wooden theories upon
which the mechanical system was formerly built up, and
how falsely interpreted seem the physiological and other
facts which lent them support, when seen in the light
of our modern physiological knowledge. Vaucanson's
or Drozsch's duck-automaton or clockwork-man, with
which the mechanical theorists of bygone days amused
themselves, would not go far to encourage the physiologist
of to-day to pursue his mechanical studies, but
would rather throw a vivid light on the impossibility of
comparing the living <q>machine</q> with machines in the
usual sense. For things emphatically do not happen
within the living organism in the same way as in the
automatic duck, and the more exact the resemblance
to the functions of a <q>real</q> duck became, the more did
the system of means by which the end was attained become
unlike vital processes. It is difficult to resist the
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
impression that in another hundred years,&mdash;perhaps
again from the standpoint of new and definitely
accepted mechanical explanations,&mdash;people will regard
our developmental mechanics, cellular mechanics, and
other vital mechanics much in the same way as we
now look on Vaucanson's duck.
</p>

<p>
Associated or even identical with this is the fact
that in proportion as mechanical interpretation advances,
the difficulties it has to surmount continually crop
up anew. Processes which seem of the simplest kind
and the most likely to be capable of purely mechanical
explanation, processes such as those of assimilation,
digestion, respiration, for which it was believed that
exact parallels existed in the purely mechanical
domain, as, for instance, in the osmotic processes of
porous membranes, are seen when closely scrutinised as
they occur in the living body to be extremely complex;
in fact they have to be transferred <q>provisionally</q> from
the mechanical to the vital rubric. To this category
belong the whole modern development of the cell-theory,
which replaces the previously <emph>single</emph> mechanism in the
living body by millions of them, every one of which
raises as many problems as the one had done in the
days of cruder interpretation. Every individual cell,
as it appears to our understanding to-day, is at least as
complicated a riddle as the whole organism formerly
appeared.
</p>

<p>
But further: the modern development of biology
has emphasised a special problem, which was first formulated
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
by Leibnitz (though it is in antithesis to his fundamental
Monad-theory), and which appears incapable
of solution on mechanical lines. Leibnitz declared living
beings to be <q>machines,</q> but machines of a peculiar
kind. Even the most complicated machine, in the
ordinary sense, consists of a combination of smaller
<q>machines,</q> that is to say, of wheels, systems of levers,
&amp;c., of a simpler kind. And these sub-machines may
in their turn consist of still simpler ones, and so on.
But ultimately a stage is reached when the component
parts are homogeneous, and cannot be analysed
into simpler machines. It is otherwise with the organism.
According to Leibnitz it consists of machines
made up of other machines, and so on, into the infinitely
little. However far we can proceed in our analysis
of the parts, we shall still find that they are syntheses,
made up of most ingeniously complex component
parts, and this as far as our powers of seeing and distinguishing
will carry us. That is to say: organisation
is continued on into the infinitely little.
</p>

<p>
Leibnitz's illustration of the fish-pond is well known.
He could have no better corroboration of his theory
than the results of modern investigation afford. His
doctrine of the continuation of organisation downwards
into ever smaller expression is confirmed to a certain
extent even by anatomy. By analysing structural
organisation down to cells a definite point seemed to
have been reached. But it now appears that at that point
the problem is only beginning. One organisation is made
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
up of other organisations&mdash;cells, protoplasm, nucleus,
nucleolus, centrosomes, and so on, according to the
power of the microscope; and these structures, instead
of explaining the vital functions of growth, development,
multiplication by division, and the rest, simply
repeat them on a smaller scale, and are thus in their
turn living units, the aggregation of which is illustrated
better by the analogy of a social organism than
by that of a mechanical structure.
</p>

<p>
In order to follow the mechanical explanation along
the six lines we have previously indicated, we shall, as
we have already said, entrust ourselves to the specialists
who are on the opposite side. The difficulties and
objections which the mechanical theory has to face
have forced themselves insistently upon us even in the
course of a short sketch such as has just been given,
but they will be clearly realised if we approach them
from the other side. But, first of all, a word as to the
fundamental and, it is alleged, unassailable doctrine on
which the theory as a whole is based, the <q>law of the
conservation of energy.</q> The appeal to this, at any
rate in the way in which it is usually made, is apt to be
so distorted that the case must first be clearly stated
before we can get further with the discussion.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Law of the Conservation of Energy.</head>

<p>
Helmholtz's proof established mathematically what
Kant had already, by direct insight, advanced as an
<hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> fundamental axiom: that in any given system
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
the sum of energy can neither increase (impossibility of
a <foreign rend='italic'>perpetuum mobile</foreign>) nor diminish (there is no
disappearance of energy, but only transformation into another
form). But even the vitalist had no need to deny this
proposition. The <q>energy</q> which is required for the
work of directing, setting agoing, changing and rearranging
the chemico-physical processes in the body, and
bringing about the effective reactions to stimuli which
result in <q>development,</q> <q>transmission,</q> <q>regeneration,</q>
and so on&mdash;if indeed any energy is required&mdash;of course
could not come <q>from within</q> as a spontaneous increase
of the existing sum of energy&mdash;that would, indeed, be a
magical becoming out of nothing!&mdash;but must naturally
be thought of as coming <q>from without.</q> The appeal
to the law of the conservation of energy is therefore in
itself irrelevant; but it conceals behind it an assertion
of a totally different kind, namely, that in relation to
physico-chemical sequences there can be no <q>without,</q>
nothing transcending them&mdash;an assertion which
Helmholtz's arguments cannot and were never intended
to establish. But before any definite attitude
to this newly imported assertion could be taken
up, it would require to be distinctly defined, and that
would lead us at once into all the depths of epistemological
discussion. Here, therefore, we can only say so
much: If this assertion is accepted it is well to see
where it carries us; namely, back to the first-described
naïve standpoint, which, without critical scruples, quite
seriously accepts the world as it appears to it for the
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
reality, and quite seriously speaks of an infinity lying
in time behind us&mdash;and therefore come to an end&mdash;and
is not in the least disturbed from its <q>dogmatic
slumber</q> by this or any of the other great antinomies
of our conception of the universe. And it remains,
too, for this standpoint to come to terms with the fact
that, in voluntary actions, of which we have the most
direct knowledge, we have through our will the power
of intervention in the physico-chemical nexus of our
bodily energies&mdash;a fact which implies the existence of
a <q>without,</q> from which interpolations or influences
may flow into the physico-chemical system, even if
there be none in regard to the domain of <q>vital</q>
phenomena. And we should require to find out
through what parallelistic or abruptly idealistic system
the <q>without</q> was done away with in this case. For
if a transcendental basis, or reverse side, or cause of
things, be admitted&mdash;even if only in the form of our
materialistic popular metaphysics (the <q>substance</q> of
Haeckel's <q>world-riddle</q>)&mdash;then a <q>without,</q> from
which primarily the cosmic system with its constant
sum of matter and energy is explained, is also admitted,
and it is difficult to see why it should have
exhausted itself in this single effort.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Criticisms of the Mechanistic Theory of Life.</head>

<p>
The course of the mechanistic theory of life has been
surprisingly similar to that of its complement, the
theory of the general evolution of the organic world.
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
The two great doctrines of the schools, Darwinism on
the one hand, the mechanical interpretation of life on
the other, are both tottering, not because of the criticism
of outsiders, but of specialists within the schools
themselves. And the interest which religion has in
this is the same in both cases: the transcendental
nature of things, the mysterious depth of appearance,
which these theories denied or obscured, become again
apparent. The incommensurableness and mystery of
the world, which are, perhaps, even more necessary to
the very life of religion than the right to regard it
teleologically, reassert themselves afresh in the all-too-comprehensible
and mathematically-formulated world,
and re-establish themselves, notwithstanding obstinate
and persistent attempts to do away with them. This
is perhaps to the advantage of both natural science
and religion: to the advantage of religion because
it can with difficulty co-exist with the universal dominance
of the mathematical way of looking at things;
to the advantage of natural science because, in giving
up the one-sidedness of the purely quantitative outlook,
it does not give up its <q>foundations,</q> its <q>right to
exist,</q> but only a <foreign rend='italic'>petitio principii</foreign> and a prejudice
that compelled it to exploit nature rather than to explain
it, and to prescribe its ways rather than to seek them
out.
</p>

<p>
The reaction from the one-sided mechanical theories
shows itself in many different ways and degrees. It
may, according to the individual naturalist, affect the
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
theory as a whole, or only certain parts of it, or only
particular lines. It starts with mere criticism and with
objections, which go no further than saying that <q>in
the meantime</q> we are still far from having reached a
physico-chemical solution of the riddle of life; it may
ascend through all stages up to an absolute rejection of
the theory as an idiosyncrasy of the time which impedes
the progress of investigation, and as an uncritical prejudice
of the schools. It may remain at the level of mere
protest, and content itself with demonstrating the
insufficiency of the mechanical explanation, without
attempting to formulate any independent theory for
the domain of the vital; or it may construct a specifically
biological theory, claiming independence amid other
disciplines, and basing this claim on the autonomy
of vital processes; or it may widen out deliberately
into metaphysical study and speculation. Taken at all
these levels it presents such a complete section of the
trend of modern ideas and problems that it would be
an attractive study even apart from the special interest
which attaches to it from the point of view of religious
and idealistic conceptions of the universe.
</p>

<p>
Both Liebig and Johannes Müller remained vitalists,
notwithstanding the discovery of the synthesis of urea
and the increasing number of organic compounds which
were built up artificially by purely chemical methods.
It was only about the middle of the last century that
the younger generation, under the leadership, in
Germany, of Du Bois-Reymond in particular, went over
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
decidedly to the mechanistic side, and carried the
doctrines of the school to ever fresh victories. But
opposition was not lacking from the outset, though it
was restrained and cautious.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Virchow's <q>Caution</q>.</head>

<p>
Here, as also in regard to <q>Darwinism,</q> which was advanced
about the same time, the typical advocate of <q>caution</q>
was Rudolf Virchow. His doubts and reservations
found utterance very soon after the theory itself had
been promulgated. In his <q>Cellular Pathologie,</q><note place='foot'><q>Arch.
für pathol. Anatomie und Physiologie,</q> Bd. VIII. 1855.</note> and
in an essay on <q>The Old Vitalism and the New,</q><note place='foot'>Vol. IX.,
1856.</note> he puts in a word for a <foreign rend='italic'>vis vitalis</foreign>.
The old vitalism, he declared, had been false because it assumed, not a
<foreign rend='italic'>vis</foreign>,
but a <foreign rend='italic'>spiritus vitalis</foreign>. The substances in animate and
in inanimate bodies have undoubtedly absolutely
the same properties. Nevertheless, <q>we must at once
rid ourselves of the scientific prudery of regarding the
processes of life solely as the mechanical result of the
molecular forces inherent in their constituent bodily
parts.</q> The essential feature of life is a derived and
communicated force <emph>additional</emph> to the molecular forces.
Whence it comes we are not told. He glided all round
the problem with platitudinarian expressions, which
were intended to show his own adherence as a matter of
course to the new biological school, and which revealed
at the same time his striking incapacity for defining a
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
problem with any precision. At a <q>certain period in
the evolution of the earth</q> this force arose, as the
ordinary mechanical movements <q>swung over</q> into the
vital. But it is thus a special form of movement,
which detaches itself from the great constants of
general movement, and runs its course alongside of,
and in constant relation to, these. (Did ever vitalist
assert more?) After thus preparing the way for a
return of the veering process at a particular stage of
evolution, and giving the necessary assurances against
the <q>diametrically opposed dualistic position,</q> Virchow
employs almost all the arguments against the mechanical
theory which vitalists have ever brought forward.
Even the catalytic properties of ferments are above the
<q>ordinary</q> physical and chemical forces. The movement
of crystallisation, too, cannot be compared with
the vital movement. For vital force is not immanent
in matter, but is always the product of previous life.<note place='foot'>The
same is true even of crystals, <q><foreign rend='italic'>omne crystallum e
crystallo</foreign>.</q></note>
In the simplest processes of growth and nutrition the
<foreign rend='italic'>vis vitalis</foreign> plays its vital
<hi rend='italic'>rôle</hi>. This is true in a much
greater degree of the processes of development and
morphogenesis. In the phenomena of irritability
life reveals its spontaneity through <q>responses,</q>
and so on. <q>Peu d'anatomie pathologique éloigne
du vitalisme, beaucoup d'anatomie pathologique y
ramène.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to make much of this position. It
leaves the theory with one of the opposing parties, the
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
practice with the other, and the problem just where it
was before.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Preyer's Position.</head>

<p>
Along with Virchow, we must name another of the
older generation, the physiologist William Preyer, who
combated <q>vitalism,</q> <q>dualism,</q> and <q>mechanism</q> with
equal vehemence, and issued a manifesto, already somewhat
solemn and official, against <q>vital force.</q> And
yet he must undoubtedly be regarded as a vitalist by
mechanists and vitalists alike.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
<q>Ueber die Aufgabe der Naturwissenschaft,</q> Jena, 1876.
<q>Naturwissenschaftliche Tatsachen und Probleme.</q> <q>Physiologie
und Entwicklungslehre,</q> 1886, in the collection of the <q>Allgemeiner
Vereins für Deutsche Literatur.</q> Also in the same collection,
<q>Aus Natur- und Menschen-leben.</q></note> He is more definite
than Virchow, for he does not content himself with
general statements as to the <q>origin</q> of vital force,
and of the <q>swinging over</q> of the merely mechanical
energies into the domain of the vital, but holds
decidedly to the proposition <foreign rend='italic'>omne vivum e vivo</foreign>. He
therefore maintains that life has always existed in the
cosmos, and entirely rejects spontaneous generation.
</p>

<p>
The fallacy, he says, of the mechanistic claims was
due to the increasing number of physical explanations
of isolated vital phenomena, and of imitations of the
chemical products of organic metabolism. A wrong
conclusion was drawn from these. <q>Any one who
hopes to deduce from the chemical and physical
properties of the fertilised egg the necessity that an
animal, tormented by hunger and love must, after a
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
certain time, arise therefrom, has a pathetic resemblance
to the miserable manufacturers of homunculi.</q> Life
is one of the underivable and inexplicable fundamental
functions of universal being. From all eternity life
has only been produced from life.
</p>

<p>
As Preyer accepts the Kant-Laplace theory of the
origin of our earth from the sun, he reaches ideas
which have points of contact with the <q>cosmo-organic</q>
ideas of Fechner. Life was present even when the
earth was a fiery fluid sphere, and was possibly more
general and more abundant then than it is now. And
life as we know it may only be a smaller and isolated
expression of that more general life.<note place='foot'><p>These
ideas are not fully worked out, and they are disguised in
poetic form&mdash;for instance, when even the play of flames is compared
to vital processes. But if they be stripped of their poetic garb,
they lead to the same conclusions to which one is always led when
one approaches the problem unprejudiced by naturalistic or
anthropomorphic preconceptions of the relation of the infinite to the
finite, or the divine to the natural. If we exclude the materialistic
or semi-materialistic position which regards teleological phenomena,
vital processes, and even states of sensation and consciousness as the
function of a <q>substance</q> or of matter, we can quite well speak of
them as general <q>cosmo-organic</q> functions of universal being,
meaning that they occur of necessity wherever the proper conditions
exist. According to the doctrine of potentiality and actuality, this is
to say that all possible stages of the higher and highest phenomena
are <foreign rend='italic'>semper et ubique</foreign>
potentially present in universal being, and that
they become actual wherever the physical processes are far enough
advanced to afford the necessary conditions.
</p>
<p>
Preyer's ideas have been revived of late, especially in the romantic
form, as, for instance, in Willy Pastor's <q>Lebensgeschichte der Erde</q>
(<q>Leben und Wissen,</q> Vol. I., Leipzig, 1903). And in certain
circles, characterised by a simultaneous veneration for and combination
of modern natural science&mdash;Haeckel, Romanticism, Novalis and
other antitheses&mdash;Fechner appears to have come to life again. The
type of this group is W. Bölsche. Naturally enough, Pastor has
turned his attention also to the recent views of Schroen in regard to
crystallisation. The fact, <foreign rend='italic'>omne crystallum e crystallo</foreign>,
like the corresponding fact, <foreign rend='italic'>omne vivum e vivo</foreign>,
was long a barrier against
mechanistic derivation. But Schroen draws a parallel between
crystallisation and organic processes, so that the alleged clearness
and obviousness of the inorganic can no longer be carried over&mdash;in
the old fashion&mdash;into the realm of life, but, conversely, the mystery
of life must be extended downwards, and continued into the
inorganic.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<p>
Among the younger generation of specialists, those
most often quoted as opponents of the mechanical
theory are probably Bunge, Rindfleisch, Kerner von
Marilaun, Neumeister and Wolff. A special group
among them, not very easy to classify, may be called
the Tectonists. Associated with them is Reinke's
<q>Theory of Dominants.</q> Driesch started from their
ranks, and is a most interesting example of consistent
development from a recognition of the impossibilities
of the mechanistic position to an individually thought-out
vitalistic theory. Hertwig, too, takes a very definite
position of his own in regard to these matters. Perhaps
the most original contribution in the whole field is
Albrecht's <q>Theory of Different Modes of Regarding
Things.</q> We may close the list with the name of
K. C. Schneider, who has carried these modern ideas on
into metaphysical speculation. Several others might
be mentioned along with and connecting these representative
names.<note place='foot'>Worthy of note and much cited is a somewhat indefinite essay
on <q>Neovitalism,</q> by the Wurzburg pathologist, E. von Rindfleisch
(in <q>Deutsche Medizinische Wochensehrift,</q> 1895, No. 38).</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Position Of Bunge and Other Physiologists.</head>

<p>
For a long time one of the most prominent figures in
the controversy was Prof. G. Bunge, of Basle, who was
one of the first modern physiologists to champion
vitalism, and who has tried to show by analogies and
illustrations what is necessarily implied in vital activity.<note place='foot'>Already
given in detail in his <q>Lehrbuch der phys. und pathol.
Chemie</q> (Second Edition, 1889), in the first chapter, <q>Vitalism and
Mechanism.</q> In the meantime a fifth revised and enlarged edition
of Bunge's book has appeared as a <q>Lehrbuch der Physiologie des
Menschen</q> (Leipzig, 1901), The relevant early essays appear here
again under the title <q>Idealism and Mechanism.</q> The arguments
are the same. It is often supposed that it is merely a question of
time, and that in the long run we must succeed in finding proofs
that the whole process of life is only a complex process of movement;
but the history of physiology shows that the contrary is the
case. All the processes which can be explained mechanically are
those which are not vital phenomena at all. It is in activity that
the riddle of life lies. The solution of this riddle is looked for,
more decidedly than before but still somewhat vaguely, in the
<q>idealism</q> of self-consciousness and its implications,
<q><hi rend='italic'>Physiologus
nemo nisi psychologus</hi>.</q> These views have been also stated in a
separate lecture: G. Bunge, <q>Vitalismus und Mechanismus,</q>
(Leipzig, 1886).</note>
The mechanical reduction of vital phenomena to physico-chemical
forces, he says, is impossible, and becomes more
and more so as our knowledge deepens. He brings forward
a series of convincing examples of the way in which
apparent mechanical explanations have broken down.
The absorption of the chyle through the walls of the
intestine seemed to be a mechanically intelligible process
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
of osmosis and diffusion. But in reality it proves to be
rather a process of selection on the part of the epithelial
cells of the intestine, analogous to the selection and
rejection exercised elsewhere by unicellular organisms.
In the same way the epithelial cells of the mammary
glands <q>select</q> the suitable substances from the blood.
It is impossible to explain in a mechanical way the
power which directs the innumerable different chemical
and physical processes within the organism, whether
they be the bewilderingly purposeful reactions in the
individual life of the cell, which seem to point to
psychic processes within the plasm, or the riddles of
development and of inheritance in particular; for how
can a spermatozoon, so small that 500 millions can lie
on a cubic line, be the bearer of all the peculiarities of
the father to the son?
</p>

<p>
In Lecture III. Bunge defines his attitude towards
the law of the conservation of energy. In so doing he
unconsciously follows the lines laid down by Descartes.
All processes of movement and all functions exhibited
by the living substance are the results of the accumulated
potential energies, and the sums of work done
and energy utilised remain the same. But the liberation
and the direction of these energies is a factor by
itself, which neither increases nor diminishes the sum of
energies. <q><foreign rend='italic'>Occasiones</foreign></q>
and <q><foreign rend='italic'>causæ</foreign></q> are brought into
the field once more. The energies effect the phenomena,
but they require <q><foreign rend='italic'>occasiones</foreign></q>
to liberate them&mdash;thus
a stone may fall to the ground by virtue of the
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
potential energies stored in it at the time of its suspension,
but it cannot fall until the thread by which it
hangs has been cut. The function of the <q><foreign rend='italic'>occasio</foreign></q>
itself is something quite outside of and without relation
to the effect caused; it is a matter of indifference
whether the thread be cut gently through with a razor
or shot in two with a cannon ball.
</p>

<p>
Kassowitz<note place='foot'><q>Allgemeine Biologie</q> (2 vols.), Vienna,
1899.</note> is an instructive example of how much
the force of criticism has been recognised even by those
occupying a convinced mechanical point of view. He
subjects all the different theories which attempt to
explain the chief vital phenomena in mechanical terms
to a long and exhaustive examination. The theories of
the organism as a thermodynamic engine, osmotic
theories, theories of ferments, interpretations in terms
of electro-dynamics and molecular-physics&mdash;are all
examined (chap. iv.); and the failure of all these
hypotheses, notwithstanding the enormous amount of
ingenuity expended in their construction, is summed up
in an emphatic <q><hi rend='italic'>Ignoramus</hi>.</q> <q>The failure is a striking
one,</q> and it is frankly admitted that, in strong
contrast to the earlier mood of confident hope, there
now prevails a mood of resignation in regard to the
mechanical-experimental investigation of the living
organism, and that even specialists of the first rank
are finding that they have to reckon again seriously
with vital force. This breakdown and these admissions
do not exactly tend to prejudice us in favour of the
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
author's own attempt to substantiate new mechanical
theories.
</p>

<p>
In the comprehensive text-book of physiological
chemistry by R. Neumeister, the mechanical standpoint
seemed to be adhered to as the ideal. But the same
writer forsakes it entirely, and disputes it energetically
in his most recent work, <q>Betrachtungen über das
Wesen der Lebenserscheinungen</q><note place='foot'>Jena,
1903.</note> (<q>Considerations as
to the Nature of Vital Phenomena</q>). He passes over
all the larger problems, such as those of development,
inheritance, regeneration, and confines himself in the
main to the physiological functions of protoplasm,
especially to those of the absorption of food and metabolism.
And he shows, by means of illustrations, in
part Bunge's, in part his own, and in close sympathy
with Wundt's views, that even these vital phenomena
cannot possibly be explained in terms of chemical
affinity, physical osmosis, and the like. In processes
of selection (such as, for instance, the excretion of
urea and the retention of sugar in the blood), the <q>aim
is obvious, but the causes cannot be recognised.</q>
Psychical processes play a certain part in the functions
of protoplasm in the form of qualitative and quantitative
sensitiveness. All the mechanical processes in
living organisms are initiated and directed by psychical
processes. Physical, chemical and mechanical laws are
perfectly valid, but they are not absolutely dominant.
Living matter is to be defined as <q>a unique chemical
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
system, the molecules of which, by their peculiar
reciprocal action, give rise to psychical and material
processes in such a way that the processes of the one
kind are always causally conditioned and started by
those of the other kind.</q> The psychical phenomena
he regards as transcendental, supernatural, <q>mystical,</q>
yet unquestionably also subject to a strict causal nexus,
although the causality must remain for ever concealed.
Starting from this basis, he analyses and rejects the
explanations which have been offered in terms of the
analogy of ferments, enzymes, or catalytic processes.
In particular, he disputes Ostwald's <q>Energismus</q> and
Verworn's Biogen hypothesis.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
especially Verworn's example of the manufacture of sulphuric
acid. See what we have previously said on the <q>second
line</q> of mechanistic theory, along which Neumeister's thought
mainly moves. See especially p. 198. As regards the <q>fifth
line,</q> the problem of the development of form in its present phase,
there is an instructive short essay by Fr. Merkel (Nachrichten der
K. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften Göttingen. Geschäftl. Mitt.
1897, Heft 2)&mdash;<q>Welche Kräfte wirken gestaltend auf den Körper
der Menschen und Tiere?</q> This essay avoids, obviously intentionally,
the shibboleths of controversy. The mechanical point of view
and the play with mechanical analogies and models are abruptly
dismissed. <q>If things, which were in themselves susceptible of
mechanical explanations, occur in the absence of the mechanical
antecedent conditions, then we must seek for other forces to enable
us to understand them.</q> And quite calmly a return is made to the
old, simple conception of a <q>regulative</q> and a <q>formative force,</q>
inherent as a capacity <hi rend='italic'>sui generis</hi>
within the <q>energids,</q> the really
living parts of the cell. The cell-energid carries within it the
<q>pattern</q> of the organisation, and the partial or perfect <q>capacity</q>
(<q>Fertigkeit</q>) for producing and reproducing the whole organism.
But these two forces <q>make use of</q> the physico-chemical forces as
tools to work out details. So to describe the state of the case is not
of course a solution of the problem; it is only a figurative formulation
of it. But that, at the present day, we can and must return to
doing this if we are to describe things simply and as they actually
occur, is precisely what is most instructive in the matter.</note>
</p>

<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>

<p>
Among the vitalists of to-day, one of the most
frequently cited, perhaps, except Driesch the most
frequently cited, is G. Wolff, a <hi rend='italic'>Privatdozent</hi>, formerly
at Würzburg, now at Basle. He has only published
short lectures and essays, and these deal not so much
with the mechanical theory as with Darwinism.<note place='foot'><q>Beiträge
zur Kritik der Darwinschen Lehre,</q> which was first
published in the <q>Biologisches Zentralblatt,</q> 1898.</note> But
in these writings his main argument is that of
his concluding chapter: the spontaneous adaptiveness
of the organism, which nullifies all contingent theories
to explain the purposiveness in ontogeny and phylogeny.
And in his lecture, <q>Mechanismus und Vitalismus,</q><note place='foot'>Leipzig,
1892.</note> in which he directs his attention especially to
criticising Bütschli's defence of mechanism, the only
problem to which prominence is given is the one with
which we are here concerned. In spite of their brevity,
these writings have given rise to much controversy,
because what is peculiar to the two standpoints is
described with precision, and the problem is clearly
defined. His criticism had its starting-point in, and
received a special impulse from an empirical proof, due
to a very happy experiment of his own, of the marvellous
regenerative capacity, and the inherent purposive
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
activity of the living organism. He succeeded in
proving that if the lens of the eye of the newt be
excised, it may be regrown. The importance of this
fact is greatly increased if we trace out in detail the
various impossible rival mechanical interpretations
which have grown up around this interesting case.
As Driesch says, <q>It is not a restoration starting from
the wound, it is a substitution starting from a different
place.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Views of Botanists Illustrated.</head>

<p>
It might have been expected that in the domain of
plant-biology, if anywhere, the mechanistic standpoint
would have been the prevailing one. For it is almost a
matter of course to regard plants as devoid of sensation
or <q>psychical</q> life, and as mechanical systems, chemical
laboratories, and reflex mechanisms, and this way of
regarding them has been made easy by the very marked
uniformity and lack of spontaneity in their vital processes
as compared with those of animals. But it is not
the case that mechanical theories have here prevailed.
The opposition to them is just as great here as elsewhere,
and from the days of Wigand onwards it has been
almost continuously sustained.<note place='foot'>Before Wigand's
larger works there had appeared F. Delpino:
<q>Applicazione della Teoria Darwinia ai Fiori ed agli Insetti Visitatori
dei Fiori</q> (Bull. della Societa Entomologica Ital., Florence
1870). He says: <q>Un principio intrinsico, reagente, finchè dura la
vita, contro le influenze estrinseche ossia contro gli agenti chimici e
fisici.</q></note> Very characteristic is
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
Pfeffer's <q>Pflanzen-Physiologie</q> (1897), which is written
professedly from the mechanist point of view. <q>Vitalism,</q>
according to this authority, is to be rejected,
but instead of <q>vital force</q> he offers us <q>given properties,</q>
and the alleged machine-like collocations of
the most minute elements. In regard, for instance, to
the riddle of development and morphogenesis, we must
simply accept it as a <q>given property,</q> that the acorn
grows in an oak and nothing else. The chemical
explanation of the vital functions of protoplasm is also
to be rejected; as a shattered watch is no longer a
watch though it remains chemically the same, so it is
with protoplasm. The available chemical knowledge
of the substances of which protoplasm is made
up is insufficient to render the vital processes intelligible.
Here, as everywhere else, we have to reckon
with ultimate <q>properties (entities), which we neither
can, nor desire to analyse further.</q> <q>The human mind
is no more capable of forming a conception of the
ultimate cause of things than of eternity.</q> If all the
views here indicated were followed out to their logical
conclusions, they would hinder rather than further the
process of reduction to terms of physico-chemical
sequences.
</p>

<p>
Kerner von Marilaun in his <q>Pflanzenleben</q> deliberately
takes up a thorough-going vitalist position,
and on this point as well as on many others he opposed
the current theory of the school (Darwinism). It is
true, he admits, that many of the phenomena in plants
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
can be explained in purely mechanical terms, but they
are only those which may occur also in non-living
structures. The specific expressions of life cannot be
explained in this way. He shows this more fully in
regard to the most fundamental of all the vital processes
in the plant-body&mdash;the breaking up of carbonic acid gas
by the chlorophyll to obtain the carbon which is the
fundamental element in all living organisms. We know
the requisite conditions: the supply of raw material, and
the sunlight from which the energy is derived. But
how the chlorophyll makes use of these to effect the
breaking up, and how it starts the subsequent syntheses
of the carbon into the most complex organic compounds
remains a mystery. And so on upwards through all the
strictly vital phenomena.
</p>

<p>
Wiesner's<note place='foot'><q>Elemente der
Wissenschaftlichen Botanik. Biologie der
Pflanzen.</q> 1889.</note> view of things is essentially similar. He
gives a very impressive picture of the mystery of the
chemistry of the plant, showing how small is the number
of food-stuffs and raw materials in comparison to the
thousands of highly complex chemical substances which
the plant produces, and how much work there is involved
in de-oxydising the food and in forming syntheses. He,
too, refuses, as usual, to postulate <q>vital force.</q> Yet to
speak of <q>the fundamental peculiarities of the living
matter inherent in the organism</q> and to admit that
plants are <q>irritable,</q> <q>heliotropic,</q> <q>geotropic,</q> &amp;c.,
amounts to much the same thing as postulating vital
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
force; that is to say, to a mere naming of the specific
problem of life without explaining it. The author himself
admits this when he says in another place: <q>If I
compare organisms with inorganic systems, I find that
the progress of our knowledge is continually enlarging
the gulf which separates the one from the other!</q>
</p>

<p>
These anti-mechanical tendencies show themselves
most emphatically in the work of Fr. Ludwig.<note place='foot'><q>Lehrbuch
der Biologie der Pflanzen.</q> Stuttgart, 1895.</note> In his
concluding chapter, after a discussion of the theories of
Darwin, Nägeli, and Weismann, he postulates, for variation,
heredity, and species-formation in particular,
<q>forces other than physico-chemical,</q> <q>let us call them
frankly psychical.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is instructive to see how these <q>vitalistic</q> views
crop up even in studies of detail and of the microscopically
small, as for instance in E. Crato's <q>Beiträge zur
Anatomie und Physiologie des Elementar-organismus.</q>
How the living organism contains within itself what
is in its turn living, down into ever smaller detail,
(amœboid movements of certain plastines, physodes,)
how incomparable the living organism is with a
<q>machine,</q> to which its libellers are so fond of likening
it, how it builds itself up, steers, and stokes itself, how
it produces with <q>playful ease</q> the most marvellous
and graceful forms, makes combinations and breaks them
up, how analogous its whole activity is to <q>being able</q> and <q>willing,</q>
all this is clearly brought out.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Cohn,
<q>Beiträge zur Biologie der Pflanzen,</q> vii. 407, See
especially the concluding chapter, <q>Einiges über Functionen der
einzelnen Zellorgane.</q> From Zoology we may cite E. Teichmann's
investigation, <q>Ueber die Beziehung zwischen Astrosphären und
Furchen.</q> <q>Experimentelle Untersuchungen am Seeigelei</q> (<q>Archiv.
f. Entw. Mech.</q> xvi. 2, 1903). This paper contains no references to
<q>psychical phenomena,</q> <q>power,</q> or <q>will,</q> and we cannot but
approve of this in technical research. But it is pointed out that the
mechanistic interpretation of the detailed processes of development
has definite limitations, and we are referred to <q>fundamental
characters of living matter which we must take for granted.</q>
</p>
<p>
This is even more decidedly the case in Tad. Garbowski's beautiful
<q>Morphogenetische Studien, als Beitrag zur Methodologie zoologischer
Forschung.</q> These belong to the line of thought followed by
Driesch and Wolff, who are both frequently and approvingly quoted,
and they afford an excellent instance of that mood of dissatisfaction
with and protest against the <q>dogmas</q> of descent, selection and
phylogeny, which is observable in many quarters among the younger
generation of investigators. Garbowski vigorously combats Haeckel's
theories of development, especially <q>the fundamental biogenetic law,
and the Gastræa theory.</q> He criticises <q>mechanistic</q> interpretations
of the development of the embryo, which <q>treat the living
being morphologically, as if the matter were one of vesicles, cylinders
and plates, and not of vital units</q>: and he does not look with
favour on <q>artificial amoebæ,</q> which can move, creep, and do
everything except live. The ideal of biology is of course always a
science with laws and equations, but the key to these will not be
found in mechanics. Garbowski's studies may be highly recommended
as giving a sharp and vivid impression of the modern anti-mechanistic
tendencies observable even in technical research.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<p>
A very fresh and lucid presentation of the whole case
is given by Borodin, Professor of Botany in St. Petersburg,
in his essay, <q>Protoplasm and Vital Force.</q><note place='foot'>Trans.
by Levinsohn. <q>Beilage zur Allgemeinen Zeitung,</q>
Munich, 1898, No. 166.</note>
He sharply castigates the one-sidedness and impetuosity
of the mechanical theory, as in Haeckel's discovery of
Bathybius and of non-nucleated bacteria. The latter
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
are problematical, and the former has been proved an
illusion. To penetrate farther into the processes of life
is simply to become aware of an ever-deepening series of
riddles. There is no such thing as <q>protoplasm,</q> or
<q>living proteid,</q> or indeed any unified, simple <q>living
matter</q> whatever. Artificial <q>oil-emulsion amoebæ</q><note place='foot'>Bütschli,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, p. 200.</note>
bear the same relation to living ones that Vaucanson's
mechanical duck bears to a real one; that is, none at
all. Our <q>protoplasm</q> is as mystical as the old
<q>vital force,</q> and both are only camping-grounds for
our ignorance. Neither the mechanical nor the atomic
theory were the results of exact investigations; they
were borrowed from philosophy. We do indeed
investigate the typically vital process of irritability by
physical methods. But the response made by the
organism to physical coercion may be called a mockery
of physics. The mechanists help themselves out with
crude analogies from the mechanical, conceal the
problem with the name <q>irritability,</q> and thus get rid
of the greatest marvels. If vital force itself were to call
out from its cells, <q>Here I am,</q> they would probably see
in it only a remarkable case of <q>irritability.</q> Mechanism
is no more positive knowledge than vitalism is; it is
only the dogmatic faith of the majority of present-day
naturalists.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Constructive Criticism.</head>

<p>
Those whose protests we have hitherto been considering
have not added to their criticism of the
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
mechanical theory any positive contribution of their
own, or at least they give nothing more than very
slight hints pointing towards a psychical theory. But
there are others who have sought to overcome the
mechanical theory by gaining a deeper grasp of the
nature of <q>force</q> in general. Their attempts have
been of various kinds, but usually tend in one direction,
which can perhaps be most precisely and briefly
indicated through Lloyd Morgan's views, as summed
up, for instance, in his essay on <q>Vitalism.</q><note place='foot'><q>The
Monist,</q> 1899, p. 179.</note> In
the beginning of biological text-books, we usually find
(he says) a chapter on the nature of <q>force,</q> but it is
<q>like grace before meat</q>&mdash;without influence on quality
or digestion. Yet this problem must be cleared up
before we can arrive at any understanding of the
whole subject. In all attempts at <q>reducing to
simpler terms,</q> it must be borne in mind that <q>force</q>
reveals its nature in ever higher stages, of which every
one is new. Even cohesion cannot be reduced to terms
of gravitation, nor the chemical affinities and molecular
forces to something more primitive. They are already
something <q>outside the recognised order of nature.</q> In
a still higher form force is expressed in the processes of
crystallisation. At the formation of the first crystal
there came into action a directing force of the same
kind as the will of the sculptor at the making of the
Venus of Melos. This new element, which intervenes
every time, Lloyd Morgan regards, with Herbert
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
Spencer (<q>Principles of Biology</q>), as <q>due to that ultimate
reality which underlies this manifestation, as it
underlies all other manifestations.</q> There can be no
<q>understanding</q> in the sense of <q>getting behind
things</q>: even the actions of <q>brute matter</q> cannot be
<q>understood.</q> The play of chance not only does not
explain the living; it does not even explain the not-living.
But life in particular can neither be brought into the cell
from without, nor be explained as simply <q>emerging
from the co-operation of the components of the protoplasm,</q>
and it is <q>in its essence not to be conceived in
physico-chemical terms,</q> but represents <q>new modes of
activity in the noumenal cause,</q> which, just because it
is noumenal, is beyond our grasp. For only phenomena
are <q>accessible to thought.</q>
</p>

<p>
Among the biologists who concern themselves with
deeper considerations, Oscar Hertwig,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
<q>Entwicklung der Biologie in 19. Jahrhundert</q> (<q>Naturforscher
Versammlung,</q> 1900), and <q>Zeit- und Streit-fragen der
Biologie,</q> 1894-7, especially Part II., <q>Mechanik und Zoologie.</q></note>
the Director of
the Anatomical Institute at Berlin, has expressed ideas
similar to those we have been discussing, little as this
may seem to be the case at first sight. He desires to oust
the ordinary mechanism, so to speak, by replacing it by a
mechanism of a higher order, and in making the attempt
he examines and deepens the traditional ideas of
causality and <q>force,</q> and defines the right and wrong
of the quantitative-mathematical interpretation of
nature in general, and of mechanics in particular. He
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
follows confessedly in Lotze's path, not so much in
regard to that thinker's insistence upon the association
of the causal and the teleological modes of interpretation,
as in modifying the idea of causality. O. Hertwig
puts forward his own theories with special reference to
those of W. Roux, the founder of the new <q>Science of
the Future</q>&mdash;the mechanical, and therefore only scientific
theory of development, which no longer only describes,
but understands and causally explains phenomena
(<q>Archiv für Entwicklungsmechanik</q>). There are
two kinds of mechanism (Hertwig says): that in the
higher philosophical sense, and that in the purely physical
sense. The former declares that all phenomena are
connected by a guiding thread of causal connection and
can be causally explained. As such, its application to
the domain of vital phenomena is justifiable and
self-evident. But it is not justifiable if cause be simply
made identical with and limited to <q>force,</q> if the causal
connection be only admitted in the technical sense of the
transference and transformation of energy, and if, over
and above, it is supposed to give an <q>explanation,</q> in
the sense of an insight into things themselves. Even
mechanics is (as Kirchoff maintained) a <q>descriptive</q>
science. Hertwig agrees with Schopenhauer and Lotze
in regarding every primitive natural <q>force</q> as unique,
not reducible to simpler terms, but qualitatively distinct,&mdash;a
<q>qualitas occulta,</q> capable not of physical but
only of metaphysical explanation. And thus his conclusions
imply rejection of mechanism in the cruder
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
sense. As such, it has only a very limited sphere of
action in the realm of the living. The history of
mechanical interpretations is a history of their collapse.
The attempt to derive the organic from the inorganic
has often been made. But no such attempts have held
the field for long. We can now say with some reason
that <q>the gulf between the two kingdoms of nature
has become deeper just in proportion as our physical
and chemical, our morphological and physiological
knowledge of the organism has deepened.</q> Mach's
expression <q>mechanical mythology,</q> is quoted, and
then a fine passage on the insufficiency of the mathematical
view of things in general concludes thus:
<q>Mathematics is only a method of thought, an excellent
tool of the human mind, but it is very far from
being the case that all thought and knowledge moves
in this one direction, and that the content of our
minds can ever find exhaustive expression through it
alone.</q>
</p>

<p>
In his <q>Theory of Dominants,</q><note place='foot'><q>Die
Organismen und ihr Ursprung,</q> published in <q>Nord und Süd,</q> xviii., p.
201 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>&mdash;<q>Die Welt als Tat,</q> Berlin 1899, since
then in second edition.&mdash;<q>Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie,</q>
1901.&mdash;And <q>Der Ursprung des Lebens auf der Erde,</q> in the
<q>Türmer-Jahrbuch,</q> 1903.</note> Reinke, the botanist
of Kiel, has attempted to formulate his opposition to
the physico-chemical conception of life into a vitalistic
theory of his own. Among biologists who confess themselves
supporters of the mechanical theory, there are
some who expressly reject explanations in terms of
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
chemical and physical principles, and emphasise, more
energetically than others, that these can only give
rise to vital phenomena and complex processes of
movement, on the basis of a most delicately differentiated
structure and architecture of the living substance
in its minute details, and from the egg
onwards. They have created the strict <q>machine
theory,</q> and they may be grouped together as the
<q>tectonists.</q> <q>A watch that has been stamped to
pieces is no longer a watch.</q> Thus the merely material
and chemical is not the essential part of the
living; it is the tectonic, the machinery of structure
that is essential. The fundamental idea in this position
is precisely that of Lotze. It is not a <q>mystical,</q>
vital principle, that sets up, controls, and regulates the
physical and chemical processes within the developed or
developing organism. They receive their direction and
impulse through the fact that they are associated with
a given peculiar mechanical structure. This theory certainly
contains all the monstrosities of preformation in
the germ, the mythologies of the infinitely small, and
it suffers shipwreck in ways as diverse as the number
of its sides and parts. But it has the merit of clearly
disclosing the impossibilities of purely chemical explanations.
Reinke's <q>Theory of Dominants</q> started
from such tectonic conceptions, and so originally did
Driesch's Neovitalism, of which we shall presently have
to speak.
</p>

<p>
Reinke's theory has gone through several stages of
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
development. At first its general tenor was as follows:
Every living thing is typically different from everything
that is not living. What explains this difference?
Certainly not the hypothesis of vital force, which is far
from being clear. The idea that forces of a psychic
nature are inherent in the organism is also rejected.
The illustration of a watch helps us to understand.
The impelling force in it is certainly not merely the
ordinary force of gravity or the general elasticity of
steel. The efficacy of simple forces such as these can
be increased in infinite diversity by the <q>construction
of the apparatus</q> in which they operate. Life is the
function of a quite unique, marvellously complex,
inimitable combination of machines. If these be
given, the most complex processes fulfil themselves
of necessity and without the intervention of special
vital forces. But how can they be <q>given</q>? The
sole analogy to be found is the making of real
machines, artificial products as distinguished from
fortuitous products. They cannot be made without
the influence and activity of intelligence. To explain
the incomparably more ingenious and complex vital
machine as due to a fortuitous origin and collocation
of its individual parts would be more absurd
than it would be to think of a watch being made
in this way. The dominance of a creative idea
cannot but be recognised. An intelligent natural
force which is conscious of its aims and calculates
its means must be presupposed, if we are really to
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
satisfy our sense of causality. It is a matter of personal
conviction whether we find this force in <q>God</q> or in
the <q>Absolute.</q>
</p>

<p>
These views are more fully developed in the theory
of dominants expounded in Reinke's later work, <q>Die
Welt as Tat</q> (after what has been said the meaning of
the title will be self-evident), and in his <q>Theoretische
Biologie.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>,
the discussion by A. Drews in the <q>Preuss. Jahrbuch,</q>
October, 1902, p. 101, a review of Reinke's <q>Einleitung in die
theoretische Biologie.</q></note> Very vigorous and convincing are the
author's objections to the naturalistic theories of
organic life, especially to the <q>self-origin</q> of the
living, or spontaneous generation. In all vital processes
we must reckon with a <q>physiological <hi rend='italic'>x</hi>,</q> which
cannot be eliminated, which gives to life its unique and
underivable character. There are <q>secondary forces,</q>
<q>superforces,</q> <q>dominants,</q> which bring about what is
peculiar in vital functions and direct their processes.
<q>Vitalism</q> in the strict sense is thus here also rejected.
The machine-theory is held valid. There are <q>dominants</q>
even in our tools and utensils, in our hammer
and spoon, and the <q>operation</q> of these cannot be
explained merely physico-chemically, but through the
dominants of the form, structure and composition, with
which they have been invested by intelligence. The
association with the views of the tectonists is so far
quite apparent. But the idea of <q>dominants</q> soon
broadens out. We find dominants of form-development,
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
of evolution, and so on. What were at first only
peculiarities of structure and architecture have grown
almost unawares into dynamic principles of form which
have nothing more to do with the mechanical theory,
and which, because of their dualistic nature, result in
conclusions and modes of explanation which can hardly
be called very useful. The lines along which the idea
has developed are intelligible enough. It started
originally from that of the organism as a finished
product, functioning actively, especially in its metabolism.
Here the comparison with a steam engine
with self-regulators and automatic whistles is admissible,
and one may speak of dominants in the sense of
mechanical dominants. But the idea thus started was
pressed into general service. And thus arose dominants
of development, of morphogenesis, even of phylogenetic
evolution (<q>phylogenetic evolution-potential</q>). New
dominants are added, and the theory advances farther
and farther from the <q>machine theory,</q> becomes ever
more enigmatical, and more vitalistic.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Constructive Work of Driesch.</head>

<p>
What in Reinke's case came about almost unperceived,
Driesch did with full consciousness and intention,
following the necessity laid upon him by his own
gradual personal development and by his consistent,
tenacious prosecution of the problem. The acuteness
of his thinking, the concentration of his endeavours
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
through long years, his comprehensive knowledge and
mastery of the material, the deep logicalness and
consistent evolution of his <q>standpoints,</q> and his
philosophical and theoretical grasp of the subject
make him probably the most instructive type, indeed,
we may almost say, the very incarnation of the
whole disputed question. In 1891 he published his
<q>Mathematisch&mdash;mechanische Betrachtung morphologischer
Probleme der Biologie,</q> the work in which
he first touched the depths of the problem. It is
directed chiefly against the merely <q>historical</q>
methods in biology, used by the current schools in
the form of Darwinism. Darwinism and the Theory
of Descent have been so far nothing more than <q>galleries
of ancestors,</q> and the science ranged under
their banner is only descriptive, not explanatory.
Instead of setting up contingent theories we must
form a <q>conception</q> of the internal necessity, inherent
in the substratum itself, in accordance with
which the forms of life have found expression&mdash;a
necessity corresponding to that which conditions the
form-development of the crystal.
</p>

<p>
Experimental investigations and discoveries, and
further reflection, resulted, in 1892, in his <q>Entwicklungsmechanische
Studien,</q> and led him to insist on
the need for what the title of his next year's work calls
<q>Biologie als selbständige Grundwissenschaft.</q> In
this work two important points are emphasised. The
first is, that biology must certainly strive after precision,
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
but that this precision consists not in subordination
to, but in co-ordination with physics.
Biology must rank side by side with physics as an
<q>independent fundamental science,</q> and that in the
form of tectonic. And the second point is, that the
teleological point of view must take its place beside
the causal. Only by recognising both can biology
become a complete science.
</p>

<p>
In the <q>Analytische Theorie der organischen Entwicklung</q>
(1894) Driesch picks up the thread where he
dropped it in the book before, and spins it farther,
<q>traversing</q> his previous theoretical and experimental
results. In this work the author still strives to remain
within the frame of the tectonic and machine-theory, but
the edges are already showing signs of giving way. Life,
he says, is a mechanism based upon a given structure
(it is however a machine which is constantly modifying
and developing itself). Ontogenesis<note place='foot'>Of all
the bad Greek zoology has produced, <q>Ontogenesis</q> is
probably the worst. The Becoming of the Being! The word is used
in contrast to Phylogenesis, the becoming of the race or of the species,
and it denotes the development of the individual.</note> is a strictly
causal nexus, but following <q>a natural law the workings
of which are entirely enigmatical</q> (with Wigand).
Causality fulfils itself through <q>liberations,</q> that is to
say, cause and effect are not quantitatively equivalent;
and all effect is, notwithstanding its causal conditioning,
something absolutely new and not to be calculated
from the cause, so that there can be no question
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
of mechanism in the strict sense. And the whole is
directed by purpose.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
p. 130. Excellent observations on <q>purpose.</q> If two or
more chains of causes meet, we call it <q>chance;</q> if they do so constantly
and in a typical manner, we call it <q>purpose.</q></note> The vital processes compel us
to admit that it seems <q>as if intelligence determined
quality and order.</q> Driesch still tries to reconcile
causes and purposes as different <q>modes of regarding
things,</q> but this device he afterwards abandons. We
cannot penetrate to the nature of things either by
the causal or by the teleological method. But they
are&mdash;as Kant maintained&mdash;two modes of looking at
things, both of which are postulates of our capacity
for knowing. Each must stand by itself, and neither
can have its sequence disturbed by the interpolation
of pieces from the other. In the domain of the
causal there can be no teleological explanation, and
conversely; one might as well seek for an optical
explanation of the synthesis of water; but both are
true in their own place. The Madonna della Sedia,
looked at microscopically, is a mass of blots, looked
at macroscopically it is a picture. And it <q>is</q> both
of these.
</p>

<p>
Driesch's conclusions continue to advance, led steadily
onwards by his experimental studies. In the <q>Maschinentheorie
des Lebens,</q><note place='foot'><q>Biolog. Centralbl.,</q> 1896, p.
363.</note> he attacks his own earlier
theories with praiseworthy determination, and remorselessly
pursues them to the monstrous conclusions to
which they lead, and shows that they necessarily perish
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
because of these. He had previously declared, at first
emphatically, later with hesitation (we have already
seen why), that every single vital process is of a
physico-chemical kind, on the basis of a given <q>structure</q>
of living beings. But now he considers the living
organism as itself a result of vital processes&mdash;that is, of
development. If this also is to be explained mechanically
(as physico-chemical processes based on material
structure), then the ovum must possess
<foreign rend='italic'>in parvo</foreign> this
infinitely fine structure, by virtue of which it fulfils its
own physiological processes of maintenance, and also
becomes the efficient cause of the subsequent development.
It must bear the type of the individual and of
the species, as a rudiment (or primordium) within its own
structure. Every specific type must, however, according
to the theory of descent, be derived through an endless
process of evolution, by gradual stages, from
some primitive organism. Just as in the mechanical
becoming of the individual organism, so the primitive
protovum must also be extraordinarily intricate
and complex in its organisation if it is to give rise to
all the processes of evolution and development involved
in the succeeding ontogenies, phylogenies, regenerations,
and so forth. This is a necessary conclusion
if the machine-theory be correct, and if we refuse to
admit that vital phenomena are governed by specific
laws. This consequence is monstrous, and the theory
of the tectonists therefore false. But if it be false,
what then?
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
Driesch answers this question in the books published
in subsequent years.<note place='foot'><q>Die Lokalisation
(= spatial determination) morphogenetischer
Vorgänge, ein Beweis vitalistischen Geschehens,</q> 1899 (in <q>Archiv.
f. Entw.-Mechanik,</q> viii., 1, and separately published), and <q>Die
organischen Regulationen: Vorbereitungen zu einer Theorie des
Lebens,</q> Leipzig, 1901. Also <q>Die <q>Seele</q> als elementarer Natur-factor,</q>
(studies on the movements of organisms), Leipzig, 1903. He
gives a general review of his own evolution in the <q>Süddeutsche
Monatshefte,</q> January 1904, under the title <q>Die Selbständigkeit
der Biologie und ihre Probleme.</q></note> In these he attains his final
standpoint, and makes it more and more secure. The
<q>machine-theory,</q> and all others like it, are now definitely
abandoned. They represent the uncritical dogmatism
of a materialistic mode of thought, which binds
all phenomena to substance, and refuses to admit any
immaterial or dynamic phenomena. The alleged initial
structure is nowhere to be found. The pursuit of
things into the most minute details leads to no indication
of it. The chromatin, in which the most
important vital processes have their basis, is very
far from having this machine-like structure; it is
homogeneous. The formation of the skeleton, for
instance, of a Plubeus larva is due to migratory spontaneously
moving cells (comparable to the leucocytes
of our own body, whose migrations and activities
remind one much more of a social organism than of
a machine). The organism arises, not from mechanical,
but from <q>harmoniously-equipotential systems</q>:
that is to say, from systems every element of which
has equal functional efficiency; so that each individual
part bears within itself in an equal degree the potentiality
of the whole&mdash;an impossibility from the mechanical
point of view.
</p>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<p>
Driesch had given an experimental basis for this
theory at an earlier stage, in his experiments on the
initial stages of the development of sea-urchins, starfishes,
zoophytes, and the like. A Planarian worm cut
into pieces developed a new worm of smaller size from
each part. A mutilated Pluteus larva developed a new
food-canal, and restored the whole typical form. His
experiment of 1892 went farther still, for he succeeded
in separating the first four segmentation-cells of the
sea-urchin's egg; and from each cell obtained a
developing embryo. These facts, he maintains, compel
us to assume a mode of occurrence which is dynamically
<hi rend='italic'>sui generis</hi>, a <q>prospective tendency</q> which is a sub-concept
in the Aristotelian <q>Dynamis.</q> And the
essential difference between this kind of operation and
a mechanical operation is, that the same typical effect
is always reached, even if the whole normal causal nexus
be disturbed. Even when forced into circuitous paths
the embryo advances towards the same goal. Thus
<q>vitalism,</q> that is, the independence and autonomy of
the vital processes, is proved. The effect required is
attained through <q>action at a distance,</q> a mode of
happening which is specifically different from anything
to be found in the inorganic world, and which has its
<emph>directive</emph>, for instance, in the regeneration of lost parts,
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
<emph>not</emph> in anything corporeal or substantial, but in the end
to be attained.
</p>

<p>
In his work on <q>Organic Regulations,</q> Driesch
collects from the most diverse biological fields more
and more astonishing proofs of the activity of the
living as contrasted with physico-chemical phenomena,
and of the marvellous power the organism has to <q>help
itself</q> and to attain the typical form and reach the
end aimed at, even under the greatest diversity in the
chain of conditions. The material here brought forward
is enormous, and the author's grasp of it very
remarkable; and not the least of the merits of the book
is, that the bewildering wealth and diversity of these
phenomena, which are usually presented to us as isolated
and uncoordinated instances, is here definitely systematised
according to their characteristic peculiarities,
and from the point of view of the increasing distinctness
of the <q>autonomy</q> of the processes. The system
begins with the active regulatory functions of living
matter in the chemistry of metabolism (see particularly
the phenomena of immunisation), and ascends through
different stages up to the regulations of regeneration.
There could be no more impressive way of showing how
little life and its <q>regulations</q> can be compared to
the <q>self-regulations</q> of machines, or to the restoring
of typical states of equilibrium and of form in the
physical and chemical domain, to which the mechanists
are fond of referring.
</p>

<p>
The facts thus empirically brought together are then
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
linked together in a theory, and considered epistemologically.
We may leave out of account all that is
included in the treatment of modern idealism, immanence-philosophy,
and solipsism. All this does not arise
directly out of the vitalistic ideas, though the latter are
fitted into an idealistic framework. Extremely vivid is
the excursus on respiration and assimilation. (All
processes of building up and breaking down take
place within the organism under conditions notoriously
different from those obtaining in the laboratory. It is
radically impossible to speak of a living <q>substance</q>
according to the formula
C<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>x</hi>H<hi rend='vertical-align: sub'>y</hi>O<hi
rend='vertical-align: sub'>z</hi>, which assimilates
and disassimilates itself [sibi].) Excellent, too, are
Driesch's remarks on materialistic elucidations of
inheritance and morphogenesis. It is quite impossible
to succeed with epigenetic speculations on a
material basis (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Haacke). Weismann is so far
right, he admits, from his materialistic premisses
when he starts with preformations. But his theory,
and all others of the kind, can do nothing more
than make an infinitely small photograph of the
difficulty. They <q>explain</q> the processes of form-development
and the regeneration of animals and plants,
by constructing infinitely small animals and plants,
which develop their form and regenerate lost parts.
And Driesch holds it to be impossible to distribute
a complicated tectonic among the elements of an equipotential
system. In denying the materialistic theory
of development, Driesch again determinedly <q>traverses</q>
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
his own earlier views. He does this, too, when he
now rejects the reconciliation between causality and
teleology as different modes of looking at things. The
teleological now seems to him itself a factor playing
a part in the chain of causes, and thus making it
teleological. The key-word of all is to him the
<q>entelechy</q> of Aristotle.
</p>

<p>
In his last work on <q>The Soul,</q> Driesch follows the
impossibilities of the mechanical theories from the
domain of vital processes into that of behaviour and
voluntary actions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Views of Albrecht and Schneider.</head>

<p>
An outlook and interpretation which Driesch<note place='foot'>In the
<q>Biol. Zentralbl.,</q> June 1903, p. 427, Driesch is criticised
by Moszkowski, who rejects Driesch's teleological standpoint. But
even this criticism shows us how far the untenability of the
mechanistic position has been recognised. It is based upon a somewhat
vague dynamism, which admits that the physico-chemical and
all other mechanical interpretations have been destructively criticised
by Driesch, and recognises entelechy (<q>ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὸ τέλος ἔχον</q>).
An entelechy without τέλος!</note> maintained
for a while, but afterwards abandoned, has
been developed in an original and peculiar fashion by
Eugen Albrecht, Prosector and Pathologist in Munich.<note place='foot'><q>Vorfragen
der Biologie,</q> 1899. <q>Die <q>Ueberwindung des
Mechanismus</q> in der Biologie.</q> <q>Biolog. Zentralbl.,</q> 1901, p. 130.</note>
It is the theory of different ways of looking at things.
Albrecht indeed firmly adheres to the chemical and
physical interpretation of vital processes, regards
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
approximate completeness along these lines as the ideal
of science, and maintains their essential sufficiency. But
he holds that the mechanists have been mistaken and
one-sided in that they have upheld this interpretation
and mode of considering things as the sole and the
<q>true</q> one. According to our subjective attitude to
things and their changes, they appear to us in quite
different series of associations, each of which forms a
complete series in itself, running parallel to the others,
but not intruding to fill up gaps in them. Microscopic
and macroscopic study of things illustrate such separate
and complete series. The classical example for the
whole theory is the psycho-physical parallelism. Psychical
phenomena are not <q>explained</q> when the correlated
line of material changes and the phenomena of the
nervous system have been traced out. Similarly with
the series of <q>vital</q> phenomena, <q>vital</q> interpretation
from the point of view of the <q>living organism,</q>
runs parallel to, but distinct from the chemical and
physical analyses of vital processes. But each of
these parallel ways of regarding things is <q>true.</q> For
the current separation of the <q>appearance</q> and
<q>nature</q> of things is false, since it assumes that only
one of the possible ways of regarding things, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the
mechanical-causal mode of interpretation is essential,
and that all the others deal only with associated
appearance.
</p>

<p>
The idea that only one or two of these series can
represent the <q>true nature</q> of the phenomenon <q>can
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
only be called cheap dogma.</q> Each series is complete in
itself, and every successive phase follows directly and
without a break from the antecedent one, which alone
explains it. In this lies the relative justification of the
ever-recurring reactions to <q>vitalism.</q>
</p>

<p>
This theory of Albrecht's has all the charms and
difficulties, or impossibilities, of parallelistic interpretations
in general. Its validity might be discussed
with reference to the particular case of psycho-physical
parallelism.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
Tad. Garbowski, <q>Morphogenetische Studien,</q> p. 167. The
illustration here employed of the arc and the <q>explanation of form
by form</q> would be a good criticism of many of Albrecht's statements.</note>
</p>

<p>
To make a sound basis for itself it would require
first to clear up the causality problem, and to answer,
or at least definitely formulate the great question
whether causing (Bewirkung) is to be replaced by mere
necessary sequence&mdash;for this is where it ends. The
conclusion which, with regard to biological methods
and ideals, seems to make all concessions to the purely
mechanical mode of interpretation, is not sufficiently
obvious from the premisses. If the vital series be a
<q>real</q> one, we should expect that a <q>vitalistic</q> mode
of interpretation, with methods and aims of its own,
would be required, just as a special science of psychology
is required. The assumption that each series is complete
without a break, and that an all-including analysis
of vital processes in terms of mechanical processes must
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
ultimately be possible, is a <hi rend='italic'>petitio principii</hi>, and breaks
down before the objections raised by the vitalists.
The most central problem in the whole matter, namely,
the relation of the causal to the teleological, has not
been touched. These two concepts would, of course,
not yield <q>parallels,</q> but would be different points of
view, which could eventually be applied to each series.
</p>

<p>
K. Camillo Schneider,<note place='foot'><p>Schneider has
expounded his physiological and morphological view
in his <q>Comparative Histology.</q> In <q>Vitalismus</q> (<q>Elementare
Lebensfunctionen,</q> Vienna, 1903) he sums up his vitalistic views. It
is a comprehensive work which goes deeper than others of its class
into the detailed description and analysis of the intimate phenomena
of life. Indeed it almost amounts to an independent biology.
But the most essential vital problems, the development of form, regeneration,
and inheritance, to which Driesch gives the fullest consideration,
are all too briefly treated. In Chapters XI. and XII. the
question of vitalism expands into a far-reaching discussion of the
general outlook upon nature. We need not here concern ourselves
with his more general views. Schneider must be regarded as a representative
of the most modern tendency of <q>Psychism,</q> which,
stimulated by Mach, Avenarius, and the school of <q>immanence-philosophy,</q>
finds expression among the younger physiologists and
biologists, from Schneider to Driesch, Verworn, Albrecht, and others.
To overthrow <q>materialism</q> and <q>realism,</q> they utilise, with impetuous
delight, the ancient self-evident idea that what is given to
us is sensation. They confuse and identify such opposites as Kant
and Berkeley, and their own position with that of <q>solipsism.</q> This
outlook is still vague and vacillating, and it may perhaps compel
epistemology to return on its old path from the sophists to Plato,
from Hume to Kant. In Schneider's case, however, the thin stream
of this new sensualism is intermingled with so many intuitions and
perceptions of the deeper nature of knowledge that one is now curious
to know how this strange mixture of semi-materialism, idealism,
solipsism, and a priorism is to make the transition from its present
extremely labile phase to a condition of stable equilibrium. One
fears lest sooner or later a reaction against the contortions of this
empiricism and psychism should lead to a modern rehabilitation of
mysticism or occultism. (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> p. 295 ff.)
</p>
<p>
In an essay on <q>Vitalism</q> in the <q>Preuss. Jahrbuch,</q> Aug. 1903,
p. 276, Schneider has supplemented his previous work.
</p></note> Privatdozent in Vienna, uses
the soul, the psychical in the true sense, as the explanation
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
of the vital. What had been thought secretly
and individually by some of the vitalists already
mentioned, but had, so to speak, cropped up only as the
incidentally revealed reverse side of their negations of
mechanism, Schneider attempts definitely to formulate
into a theory. The chief merit of his book on
<q>Vitalism</q> is to be found, in Chapters II. to X., in
his thorough discussion of the chemical, physical, and
mechanical theories along the special lines of each.
</p>

<p>
The list of critics might be added to, and the
number of standpoints in opposition to mechanism
greatly increased. This diversity of standpoint, and
the individual way in which each independent thinker
reacts from the mechanical theory shows that here,
as also in regard to Darwin's theory of selection,
we have to do with a dogmatic theory and a forced
simplification of phenomena, not with an objective and
calm consideration of things as they are. It is a theory
where <foreign rend='italic'>simplex</foreign>
has become <foreign rend='italic'>sigillum falsi</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>How all this affects the Religious Outlook.</head>

<p>
These denials and destructive criticisms of the mechanical
theory, which are now continually cropping up,
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
lead, as must be obvious, towards a deeper conception
and interpretation of reality in general, and towards a
religious conception in particular. Unquestionably
the most important fact in connection with them is the
fresh revelation of the depth of things and of appearance,
the increased recognition that our knowledge is
only leading us towards mystery.
</p>

<p>
It is indeed questionable whether anything more
than this can be said in regard to the problem of life,
whether we ought not to content ourselves with recognising
the limits of our knowledge, and reject all
positive statements that go beyond these limits. For
the mechanists are undoubtedly right in this, that
<q>entelechy,</q> <q>the idea of the whole,</q> <q>co-operation,</q>
<q>guidance,</q> <q>psychical factors,</q> and the like, are only
names for riddles, and do not in themselves constitute
knowledge.<note place='foot'>If the protest of natural science against these means no more
than that they should be excluded as inaccessible to scientific understanding,
from the domain of its investigation, but not from reality,
it is perhaps fully justified in its methods.</note> The case here is somewhat similar to
what we have already seen in connection with <q>antinomies.</q>
They, too, give us no positive insight into
the true nature of things, but they at any rate prove
to us that we have not yet understood what that is.
And, just as they show us that our knowledge of the
world as it appears to us can never be complete, so
here it appears that we come upon inexplicabilities
even within the domain accessible to our knowledge.
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
Thus the religious conception of the world gains something
here as from the antinomies, namely, a fresh
proof that the world which appears to us and can be
comprehended by us, proclaims its true nature and
depths, but does not reveal them. Perhaps there is
still another gain. For in any case the vital processes
and the marvels of evolution and development are
examples of the way in which physical processes are
constantly subject to a peculiar guidance, which certainly
cannot be explained from themselves or in
terms of mechanism, organisation, and the like. All
attempts to demonstrate this in detail, all <q>explanations</q>
in terms of dynamic co-operation, of dominants,
of ideas, or anything else, are vague, and seem to go to
pieces when we try to take firm hold of them. But
the fact remains none the less.
</p>

<p>
May not this be a paradigm of the processes and
development of the world at large, and even of
evolution in the domain of history? Here, too, all
ideas of guidance, of endeavour after an aim, &amp;c., which
philosophical study of history or religious intuition
seems to find, make shipwreck against the fact that every
attempt to demonstrate their nature, fails. All these
theories of influx, concursus, and so on, whether
transcendental or immanent factors be employed, immediately
become wooden, and never admit of verification
in detail. But precisely the same is true
of the dominance of the <q>idea,</q> or of the <q>law
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
of evolution,</q> or of the <q>potential of development</q>
in every developing organism. Yet incomprehensible
and undemonstrable in detail as this <q>dominance</q>
is, and completely as it may be concealed
behind the play of physical causes, it is there, none
the less.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. Autonomy Of Spirit.</head>

<p>
The aim of our study has been to define our attitude
to naturalism, and to maintain in the teeth of naturalism
the validity and freedom of the religious conception of
the world. This seemed to be cramped and menaced
by those <q>reductions to simpler terms</q> which we have
already discussed.
</p>

<p>
But one of these reductions, the most important of
all, we have not yet encountered, and it remains to be
dealt with now. In comparison with this one all others
are relatively unimportant, and it is easy to understand
how some have regarded the problem of the relations
of the naturalistic and the religious outlook as beginning
at this point, and have neglected everything
below it. For we have now to consider the attempt of
naturalism to <q>reduce</q> spirit itself to terms of nature,
either to derive it from nature, or, when that is recognised
as quite too confused and impossible, to make it
subject to nature and her system of laws, or to similar
laws, and thus to rob it of its freedom and independence,
of its essential character as above nature and free from
it, and to bring it down to the level of an accompanying
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
shadow or a mere reverse side of nature. The
aggressive naturalism which we have discussed has from
very early times exercised itself on this point, and has
instinctively and rightly felt that herein lies the kernel
of the whole problem under dispute. It has for the
most part concentrated its interest and its attacks upon
the <q>immortality of the soul.</q> But while this was often
the starting-point, the nature of soul, and spirit, and
consciousness in general have been brought under discussion
and subjected to attacks which sought to show how
vague and questionable was the reality of spirit as contrasted
with the palpable, solid and indubitable reality
of the outer world. Prominence was given to the fact
that the spiritual side of our nature is dependent on
and conditioned by the body and bodily states, the
external environment, experiences and impressions.
These were often the sole, and always the chief subjects
of the doctrine of the vulgar naturalism. But the
same is true of the naturalism of the higher order,
as we described it in Chapter II. In order to
acquire definite guiding principles of investigation, it
makes the attempt to find the true reality of phenomena
in the mechanical, corporeal, physiological
processes, and to take little or no account of the
co-operation, the interpolation, the general efficiency
of sensation, perception, thought, or will, and to treat
them as though they were a shadow and accompaniment
of reality, but not as an equivalent, much less
a preponderating constituent of it. Out of these
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
fundamental principles of investigation, and out of
the opposition and doubt with which the spiritual is
regarded, there is compounded the current mongrel
naturalism, which, without precision in its ideas, and
without any great clearness or logical consequence in
its views, is thoroughly imbued with the notion that
that only is truly real which we can see, hear, and
touch&mdash;the solid objective world of matter and energy,
and that <q>science</q> begins and ends with this. As
for anything outside of or beyond this, it is at most
a beautiful dream of fancy, with which it is quite
safe to occupy oneself as long as one clearly understands
that of course it is not true. <q>Nature</q> is the
only indubitable reality, and mind is but a kind of
<foreign rend='italic'>lusus</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>luxus naturæ</foreign>, which accompanies it at some
few places, like a peculiarly coloured aura or shadow,
but which must, as far as reality is concerned, yield
pre-eminence to <q>Nature</q> in every respect.
</p>

<p>
The religious conception is deeply and essentially
antagonistic to all such attempts to range spirit,
spiritual being, and the subjective world under
<q>nature,</q> <q>matter,</q> <q>energy,</q> or whatever we may
call what is opposed to mind and ranked above it in
reality and value. The religious conception is made
up essentially of a belief in spirit, its worth and pre-eminence.
It does not even seek to compare the
reality and origin of spirit with anything else whatever.
For all its beliefs, the most sublime and the
crudest alike, conceal within them the conviction that
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
fundamentally spirit alone has truth and reality, and
that everything else is derived from it. It is a somewhat
pitiful mode of procedure to direct all apologetic
endeavours towards the one relatively small question
of <q>immortality,</q> thus following exactly the lines
usually adopted by the aggressive exponents of
naturalism, and thus allowing opponents to dictate
the form of the questions and answers. It is quite
certain that all religion which is in any way complete,
includes within itself a belief in the everlastingness of
our spiritual, personal nature, and its independence
of the becoming or passing away of external things.
But, on the one hand, this particular question can only
be settled in connection with the whole problem, and,
on the other hand, it is only a fraction of the much
farther-reaching belief in the reality of spirit and its
superiority to nature. The very being of religion
depends upon this. That it may be able to take itself
seriously and regard itself as true; that all deep and
pious feelings, of humility and devotion, may be
cherished as genuine and as founded in truth; that
it behoves it to find and experience the noble and
divine in the world's course, in history and in individual
life; that the whole world of feeling with all its
deep stirrings and mysteries is of all things the most
real and true, and the most significant fact of existence&mdash;all
these are features apart from which it is impossible
to think of religion at all. But they all depend upon
the reality, independence and absolute pre-eminence of
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
spirit. Freedom and responsibility, duty, moral control
and self-development, the valuation of life and
our life-work according to our life's mission and ideal
aims, even according to everlasting aims, and <q>sub
specie æterni,</q> the idea of the good, the true and
the beautiful&mdash;all things apart from which religion
cannot be thought of&mdash;all these depend upon spirit
and its truth. And finally <q>God is Spirit</q>: religion
cannot represent, or conceive, or possess its own
highest good and supreme idea, except by thinking in
terms of the highest analogies of what it knows in itself
as spiritual being and reality. If spirit is not real and
above all other realities; if it is derivable, subordinate
and dependent, it is impossible to think of anything whatever
to which the name of <q>God</q> can be given. And this
is as true of the refined speculations of the pantheistic
poetic religions, as of the idea of God in simple piety.
The interest of religion as against the claims of
naturalism includes all this. And it would be doing
the cause of religion sorry service to extract from this
whole some isolated question to which the mood of the
time or traditional custom has given prominence. Our
task must be to show that religion maintains its validity
and freedom because of the truth and independence of
spirit and its superiority to nature.
</p>

<p>
It is, of course, impossible to give an exhaustive
treatment of this problem in a short study like this.
The answer to this question would include the whole
range of mental science with all its parts and branches.
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
Mental science, from logic and epistemology up to and
including the moral and æsthetic sciences, proves by its
very existence, and by the fact that it cannot be reduced
to terms of natural science, that spirit can neither be
derived from nor analysed into anything else. And it
is only when we have mastered all this that we can say
how far and how strongly knowledge and known realities
corroborate religion and its great conclusions as to spirit
and spiritual existence, how they reinforce it and admit
its validity and freedom. Since this is so, all isolated and
particular endeavours in this direction can only be a
prelude or introduction, and a more or less arbitrary
selection from the relevant material of facts and ideas.
And nothing more than this is aimed at in the following
pages.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Naturalistic Attacks on the Autonomy of the
Spiritual.</head>

<p>
The attacks that have been made by naturalism upon
the independence and freedom of the spiritual are so
familiar to every one&mdash;even from school days&mdash;through
books of the type of Büchner's <q>Kraft und Stoff,</q>
and Haeckel's <q>The Riddle of the Universe,</q> and
other half or wholly materialistic popular dogmatics,
that it is unnecessary to enter into any detail. Very
little that is new has been added in this connection to
the attack made by Plato on himself in the <q>Phædo</q>
through Simmias and Kebes. It is only apparently
that the modern attacks have become more serious
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
through the deepened knowledge of natural science. At
all times they have been as serious and as significant as
possible, and the religious and every other idealistic
conception of the universe has always suffered from them.
It is plain that here, if anywhere, <q>faith goes against
appearances,</q> and that in the last resource we have to
postulate free moral resolution, the will to believe,
the desire for the ideal, for freedom, and for the eternity
of the spirit, and the confidence of the spirit in
itself. All this is, or at least ought to be, self-evident
and generally admitted.
</p>

<p>
Let us once more take a brief survey of the reasons
on the other side and arrange them in order.
</p>

<p>
That nature is everything and spirit very little seems
to follow from a very simple circumstance. There are
whole worlds of purely natural and corporeal existence
without mind, sensation, or consciousness, which, quite
untroubled by their absence, simply exist according
to the everlasting laws of matter and energy. But
nowhere do we find spirit or mind without a material
basis. All that is psychical occurs in connection with
a physical being, and with relatively few physical
beings. Spirit seems wholly bound up with and dependent
upon the states, development, and conditions
of material being. With the body of living beings
there arises what we call <q>soul</q>; with the body it
grows, gains content, changes, matures, ages, and disappears.
According as the body is constituted and
composed, as it is influenced by heredity, race, and
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
selection, by nutrition, mode of life, climate, and
other circumstances, there are developed in a hundred
different ways what we call the natural disposition or
character, inclinations, virtues or vices, passions or
temperaments. Even the names given to the different
temperaments emphasise this dependence of what is
innermost in us, the deepest tendencies of our being, on
the bodily organisation and the nature of its physiological
constitution. The man whose blood flows easily
and freely is called sanguine, and the melancholic is the
victim of his liver. According as our organs are good
or bad, function freely or sluggishly, our mood rises or
sinks, we are bold or cowardly, languid or impetuous,
and enthusiasm is often enough only a peculiar name
for a state which, physiologically expressed, might be
called alcoholic poisoning. There is one soul in the
sound body, another in the sickly. Fever, and the impotence
of the soul against it, made Holbach a materialist.
If the brain be diseased, that marvellous order of
psychical processes which we call reasoning is broken;
the <q>soul</q> is wholly or partly eliminated; it fades
away, or becomes nothing more than a confused disconnected
medley of images and desires. Even artificial
interference with, and changes in the bodily organisation
react upon the mind. The removal of the thyroid gland
may result in idiocy. Castration not only prevents the
<q>breaking</q> of the voice in the Sistine choristers, it
damps the fires of life to dulness, and makes of the
impetuous Abelard a comfortable discursive father-confessor.
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
The mind is bound up almost piece by piece
with its material basis. Through the <q>localisation</q>
of psychic processes in the particular parts of the
brain, naturalism has enormously strengthened the
impression that existed even among the ancients, that
sensation and imagination are nothing more than, let
us say, what the note is to a tightly stretched string.
Cerebrum and cerebellum are regarded as the seats of
different psychic processes. The secret of the higher
processes is believed to be hidden in the grey matter
of the cortex of the cerebrum. We seek and find in
the various lobes and convolutions of the brain the
<q>centres</q> for the different capacities, the power of
sight, of smell, of moving the arms, of moving the
legs, of associating ideas, of co-ordinated speech,
and so on. When brain and spinal cord are injured
or removed piece by piece from a pigeon or a frog, it
seems as if the <q>soul</q> were eliminated piece by piece,&mdash;the
capacity for spontaneous free co-ordination, for
voluntary action, for the various sense-impressions, and
so on from the higher to the lower. It has even
been maintained that the different feelings and perceptions
which are gradually acquired can be apportioned
among the individual cells of the brain in which they
are localised, and the thought-processes, the associations
of percepts, the origin of consecutive ideas, the rapid
and easy recalling of memory-images, and the process of
voluntary control, of instincts, can be explained as due
to the <q>gradual laying down of nerve-paths</q> between
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
the different centres and areas of localisation in the
brain. All this seems to refute utterly the old belief
in the unity and personality of the soul. It is different
in youth and in age, and indeed varies continually. It
is the ever-varied harmony of the notes of all the strings
which are represented by the fibres and ganglion-cells
of the nerve-substance. It apparently can not only
be completely confused and brought to disharmony, but
it may be halved and divided. An almost terrifying
impression was produced when Trembley in 1740 made
the experiment of cutting a <q>hydra</q> in two, and
showed that each of the halves became a complete
animal, so that obviously each of the two halves of the
soul grew into a new hydra-soul. And Trembley's
hydra was only the precursor of all the cut-up worms,
of the frogs, birds, and guinea-pigs that have been
beheaded, or have had their brain removed, or their
nerves cut, and have furnished further examples of this
divisibility of <q>souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
If the independence of the spiritual is thus shown to
be a vain assumption, the alleged difference between
the animal and the human Psyche is much more so. Not
from the days of Darwinism alone, but from the very
beginning, naturalism has opposed this claim to
distinctiveness. But it is due to Darwinism that the
fundamental similarity of the psychical in man and
animals has come to be regarded as almost self-evident.
The mental organisation of man, as well as his corporeal
organisation, is traced back through gradual stages to
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
animal antecedents, and in thus tracing it there are two
favourite methods of procedure, which are, however, apt
to be mutually destructive.
</p>

<p>
On the one hand, some naturalists regard the
animal anthropomorphically, insist on its likeness to
man, discovering and extolling, not without emotion,
all the higher and nobler possessions of the human
mind, intellectual capacities, reason, reflection, synthesis,
fancy, the power of forming ideas and judgments, of
drawing conclusions and learning from experience,
besides will in the true sense, ethical, social and
political capacities, æsthetic perceptions, and even fits
of religion in elephants, apes, dogs, down even to ants
and bees, and these naturalists reject old-fashioned
explanations in terms of instinct, and find the highest
already contained in the lowest. Those of another
school are inclined to regard man theriomorphically, to
insist on his likeness to animals, explaining reason in
terms of perception and sensation, deriving will from
impulse and desire, and ethical and æsthetic valuations
from physiological antecedents and purely animal
psychological processes, thus, in short, seeking to find
the lowest in the highest. (We have already met with
an analogous instance of a similarly fallacious double-play
on parallel lines.) So it comes about that both the
origin and the development of the psychical and spiritual
seem to be satisfactorily cleared up and explained,
and at the same time a new proof is adduced for its
dependence upon the physical. For what is true of all
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
other parts of the organisation, of the building up and
perfecting of every member and every system of organs,
the bony skeleton, the circulatory system, the alimentary
canal, that they can be referred back to very simple
beginnings, and that their evolution may be traced
through all its stages&mdash;is equally true of the nervous
system in general and of the brain in particular. It
increases more and more in volume and in intricacy of
structure, it expands the cranial cavity and diversifies its
convolutions. And the more it grows, and the more
complex it becomes, the more do the mental capacities
increase in perfection, so that here again it seems once
more apparent that the psychical is an accompaniment
and result of the physical.
</p>

<p>
Popular naturalism usually stops short here, and
contents itself with half-truths and inconsequences, for it
naïvely admits that psychical processes, sensation, perception,
will, have a real influence upon the physical, and,
not perceiving how much the admission involves, it
does not trouble itself over the fact that, for instance
in the so-called voluntary movements of the body, in
ordinary behaviour, the psychical, and the will, in
particular, is capable of real effect, and can move hand
and foot and the whole body, and thus has a real
reciprocal relation with the physical. This form of
popular naturalism sometimes amuses itself with assuming
a psychical inwardness even in non-living matter,
and admitting the co-operation of psychical motives
even in regard to it.
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<p>
But it is far otherwise with naturalism in the strict
sense, which takes its fundamental principles and its
method of investigation seriously. It is aware that
such half-and-half measures interrupt the continuity of
the system at the most decisive point. And therefore
with the greatest determination it repeats along psychological
lines the same kind of treatment that it has
previously sought to apply to biological phenomena:
the corporeal must form a sequence of phenomena
complete in itself and not broken into from without.
All processes of movement, all that looks as if it
happened <q>through our will,</q> through a resolve due to
the intervention of a psychical motive, every flush of
shame that reddens the cheek, every stroke executed
by the hand, every sound-wave caused by tongue and
lips, must be the result of conditions of stimulation
and tension in the energy of the body itself.
</p>

<p>
This is the meaning of all those psycho-physical experiments
that have been carried on with so much ingenuity
and persistence (usually associated with attempts
to explain vital phenomena in terms of mechanism).
First, they attempt to interpret the expressions of will,
feeling and need, the spontaneous activities and movements
of the lowest forms of life&mdash;protists&mdash;as <q>pure
reflexes,</q> as processes which take place in obedience to
stimuli, and thus are ultimately due to chemical and
physical influences and causes without the intervention
of a psychical motive; and, secondly, when this has been
apparently or really achieved, the theory of irritability
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
and reflex mechanism is pushed from below upwards,
until even the most intricate and complex movements
and operations of our own body, which we have
wrongly distinguished as acts or behaviour from mere
processes of stimulation, are finally recognised as reflexes
and liberations due to stimuli. Some stimulus or
other, from light or sound or something else, is, according
to this theory, conducted to the nervous centre,
the ganglion, the spinal cord, the cerebellum or the
cerebrum. Here it produces an effect, not of a psychical
nature, but some minute chemical, or physical,&mdash;or
purely mechanical change, which goes through many
permutations within the nervous centre itself, unites
there with the stored energies, and then, thus altered,
returns by the efferent nerve paths to effect a muscle-contraction
in some organ, a stretching of the hand, or
a movement of the whole body. The physical process
is accompanied by a peculiar inward mirroring, which
is the psychical penumbra or shadow of the whole
business. Thus what is in reality a purely mechanical
and reflex sequence appears like a psychical experience,
like choice and will and psychical causality. We may
be compared to Spinoza's stone; it was thrown, and it
thought it was flying.
</p>

<p>
The reasons for interpreting things in this way lie in
the principles of investigation. It is only in this way,
we are told, that nature can be reduced to natural
terms, that is, to chemistry, physics, and mechanics.
Only in this way is it possible to gain a true insight
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
into and understanding of things, and to bring them
under mathematical formulæ. Thus only, too, can <q>the
miraculous</q> be eliminated. For if we are obliged to
admit that the will has a real influence on the corporeal,
for instance upon our brain, and nerves, and arm-muscles,
this would be a violation of the law of the constancy
of the sum of energy. For in this case there would
occur, at a certain point in the nexus of phenomena, a
piece of work done, however small it might be, for
which there was no equivalent of energy in the previous
constitution. But this is, since the days of Helmholtz,
an impossible assumption. And thus all those experiments
and theories on what we have called the
<q>second line</q> of mechanistic interpretation of the
universe show themselves to be relevant to our present
subject.
</p>

<p>
Interpretations of the psychical such as these have
given rise to four peculiar <q>isms</q> of an epistemological
nature, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, related to a theory of knowledge. Not infrequently
they are the historical antecedents which result
in the naturalistic theory of the psychical. These are
nominalism and sensualism, empiricism and a-posteriorism,
which, setting themselves against epistemological
rationalism, assail the dignity, the independence, and the
autonomy of the thinking mind. They are so necessarily
and closely associated with naturalism that their fate is
intimately bound up with its fate, and they are
corroborated or refuted with it. And it would be
possible to conduct the whole discussion with which we
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
are concerned purely with reference to these four
<q>isms.</q> The strife really begins in their camp.
</p>

<p>
The soul is a <foreign rend='italic'>tabula rasa</foreign>, all four maintain, a white
paper on which, to begin with, nothing is inscribed.
It brings with it neither innate knowledge nor commands.
What it possesses in the way of percepts,
concepts, opinions, convictions, principles of action,
rules of conduct, are inscribed upon it through experience
(empiricism). That is, not antecedent to, but
subsequent to experience (a posteriori). But experience
can only be gained through the senses. Only thus
does reality penetrate into and stamp itself upon
us. <q>What was not first in the senses (sensus)
cannot be in the intelligence.</q> What the senses convey
to us alone builds up our mental content, from mere
sensory perceptions upwards to the most abstract ideas
from the simplest psychical elements up to the most
complex ideas, concepts, and conclusions, to the most
varied imaginative constructions. And in the development
of the mental content the <q>soul</q> itself is merely the
stage upon which all that is acquired through the senses
crowds, and jostles, and unites to form images, perceptions,
and precepts. But it is itself purely passive, and
it becomes what happens to it. Therefore it is not
really spirit at all, for spirit implies spontaneity,
activity, and autonomy.
</p>

<p>
Philosophy and the mental sciences have always
had to carry on the strife with these four opponents.
And it is in the teacup of logic and epistemology
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
that the storm in regard to theories of the
universe has arisen. It is there, and not in the
domain of neurology, or zoology, that the real battlefield
lies, upon which the controversy must be fought
out to the end. What follows is only a sort of skirmish
about the outposts.
</p>

<p>
What naturalism holds in regard to the psychical
and spiritual may be, perhaps, most simply expressed by
means of an illustration. Over a wide field there glide
mighty shadows in constant interplay. They expand
and contract, become denser or lighter, disappear for a
little, and then reveal themselves again. While they
are thus forming and changing, one state follows quite
connectedly on another. At first one is tempted to
believe that they are self-acting and self-regulating,
that they move freely and pass from one state to
another according to causes within themselves. But
then one sees that they are thrown upon the earth from
the clouds above, now in this way and now in that, that
all their states and forms and changes are nothing in
themselves, and neither effect anything in themselves
nor react upon the occurrences and realities up above,
which they only accompany, and by which they are
determined without any co-operation on their own part,
even in determining their own form. So it is with
nature and spirit. Nature is the true effective reality;
spirit is its shadow, which effects nothing either within
or outside of itself, but simply happens.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Fundamental Answer.</head>

<p>
How can the religious conception of the world justify
itself and maintain its freedom in face of such views of
spirit and spiritual being? It is questionable whether
it is worth while attempting to do so. Is not the
essence of the validity and freedom of spirit made most
certain simply through the fact that it is able to inquire
into it? If we leave popular naturalism out of the
question, is not the attempt made by scientific naturalism
the best witness against itself? For scientific
study, and the establishment of fundamental conceptions
and guiding principles are only possible if mind and
thought are free and active and creative. The direct
experience that spirit has of itself, of its individuality
and freedom, of its incomparability with all that is
beneath it, is far too constant and genuine to admit of
its being put into a difficulty by a doctrine which it
has itself established. And this doctrine has far too
much the character of a <q>fixed theory</q> to carry
permanent inward conviction with it. Here again,
the mistake made is in starting with scepticism and
with the fewest and simplest assumptions. It is by no
means the case that in order to discover the truth we
must start always from a position of scepticism, instead
of from calm confidence in ourselves and in our
conviction that we possess in direct experience the
best guarantee of truth. For we experience nothing
more certainly than the content and riches of our own
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
mind, its power of acting and creating, and all its great
capacities. And it is part of the duty laid upon us
by the religious conception of the universe, as well as
by all other idealistic conceptions, to follow this path
of self-assurance alone, that is, through self-development
and self-deepening, through self-realisation and self-discipline,
to use to the full in our lives all that we
have in heart and mind as possibilities, tendencies,
content, and capacities, and so practically to experience
the reality and power of the spiritual that the mood of
suspicion and distrust of it must disappear. The
validity of this method is corroborated by all the critical
insight into the nature of our knowledge that we have
gained in the course of our study, and it might be
deepened in regard to this particular case. For here, if
anywhere, we must recognise the limitations of our
knowledge; the impossibility of attaining to a full
understanding of the true nature and depths of things
applies to the inquiring mind and its hidden nature.
From Descartes to Leibnitz, Kant, and Fries, down to
the historian of materialism itself, F. A. Lange, it has
been an axiom of the idealistic philosophy, expressed
now in dogmatic, now in critical form, that the mathematical-mechanical
outlook and causal interpretation of
things, not excluding a naturalistic psychology, is
thoroughly justifiable as a method of arranging scientifically
the phenomena accessible to us and of penetrating
more deeply towards an understanding of these.
It is, indeed, justifiable, so long as it does not profess
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
to reveal the true nature of things, but remains conscious
of the free spirit, whose own work and undertaking
the whole is.
</p>

<p>
Yet here again it is by no means necessary to
surrender to naturalism a field which it has tried to
take possession of, but is certainly unable to hold. We
need not try to force naturalism to read out of
empirical psychology the high conclusions as to human
nature and spirit which pertain to the religious outlook,
or to find in the <q>simplicity</q> of the <q>soul monad</q> a
kind of physical proof of its indestructibility, or anything
of that kind. We maintain that to comprehend the
true inwardness of the vitality, freedom, dignity, and
power of the spirit is not the business of psychology at
all, but may perhaps be dealt with in ethics, if it be
not admitted that with these concepts one has already
entered the realm of religious experience, and that they
are the very centre of religious theory. But undoubtedly
we must reject in great measure the claims
which naturalism makes upon our domain, and maintain
that the most important starting-points for the higher
view are to be found in the priority of everything
spiritual over everything material, in the underivability
of the spiritual and the impossibility of describing it in
corporeal-mathematical terms and concepts.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Individual Development.</head>

<p>
What lives in us, as far as we can perceive and trace
it in its empirical expression, is not a finished and
spiritual being that leaps, mature and complete, from
some pre-existence or other into its embodied form, but
is obviously something that only develops and becomes
actual very gradually. Its becoming is conditioned
by <q>stimuli,</q> influences, impressions from without, and
perfects itself in the closest dependence upon the
becoming of the body, is inhibited or advanced with it,
and may be entirely arrested by it, forced into abnormal
developments which never attain to the level of an <q>ego</q>
or <q>personality,</q> but remain incomprehensible anomalies
and monstrosities. In general, the psychical struggles
slowly and laboriously free from purely vegetative and
physiological processes, and gains control over itself and
over the body. Its self-development and concentration
to full unity and completeness of personality is only
achieved through the deepest self-culture, through complete
<q>simplification</q> as the ancients said, through
great acts and experiences of inward centralisation such
as that which finds religious expression in the metaphor
of <q>regeneration.</q> What <q>building up</q> and self-development
of the psychical means remains obscure.
If we think of it as a summation, an adding on of new
parts and constituents, and thus try to form a concrete
image of the process, we spoil it altogether. If we
speak of the transition from the potential to the actual,
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
from the tendency to the realisation, we may not indeed
spoil it, but we have done little to make the process
more intelligible. So much only we can say: certain
as it is that the Psyche, especially as conscious inner
life, only gradually develops and becomes actual, and
that in the closest dependence upon the development,
maturing, and establishment of the nervous basis and
the bodily organisation in general, yet the naturalistic
view, <hi rend='italic'>a fortiori</hi> the materialistic, is never at any point
correct. There are three things to be borne in mind.
First, the origin, the <q>whence</q> of the psychical is
wholly hidden from us, and, notwithstanding the theory
of evolution and descent, it remains an insoluble riddle.
And secondly, however closely it is associated with and
tied down to the processes of bodily development, it is
never at any stage of its development really a function
of it in actual and exact correspondence and dependence.
And finally, the further it advances in its self-realisation,
the further the relation of dependence recedes into the
background, and the more do the independence and
autonomy of the psychical processes become prominent.
</p>

<p>
We have still to consider and amplify this in several
respects, and then we may go on to still more important
matters.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Underivability.</head>

<p>
The first of the three points we have called attention
to has, so to speak, become famous through the lectures
of du Bois-Reymond, which attracted much attention,
on <q>The Limits of Natural Knowledge,</q> and <q>The Seven
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
Riddles of the Universe.</q> That these thoughtful
lectures made so great an impression did not mean that
a great new discovery had been made, but was rather a
sign of the general lack of reflection on the part of the
public, for they only expressed what had always been
self-evident, and what had only been forgotten through
thoughtlessness, or concealed by polemical rhetoric.
Consciousness, thought, even the commonest sensation
of pleasure and pain, or the simplest sense-perception,
cannot be compared with <q>matter and energy,</q> with
the movements of masses. They represent a foreign
and altogether inexplicable guest in this world of
matter, molecules, and elements. Even if we could
follow the play of the nervous processes with which
sensation, consciousness, pain, or pleasure are bound up,
into their most intricate and delicate details, if we could
make the brain transparent, and enlarge its cells to the
size of houses, so that, with searching glance, we could
count and observe all the processes, and even follow the
dance of the molecules within it, we should never see
<q>pain,</q> <q>pleasure,</q> or <q>thought,</q> or anything more
than bodies and their movements. A thought, such as,
for instance, the perception that two and two make four,
is not long or broad, above or beneath; it cannot be
measured or weighed in inches or pounds like matter,
tested with the manometer, thermometer, or electrometer
for its potential or intensity and tension,
measured by ampères or volts or horse-powers like
energies and electric currents; it is something wholly
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
different, which can be known only through inner
experience, but which is much better known than anything
else whatever, and which it is absolutely impossible
to compare with anything but itself. Even if we
admit that it can only become actual and develop as
an accompaniment of processes within bodies, and only
within those bodies we call <q>living,</q> and that wherever
bodies exist psychical phenomena occur; even if we
were able, as we never shall be able, to produce living
beings artificially in a retort, and even if psychical
phenomena occurred in these also, we should still have
made no progress towards explaining what the psychical
really is. It would still only be the blazing up in these
bodies of a flame which, in some inexplicable way, had
fallen upon them, and associated itself with them. We
do not doubt that this association, where it takes place,
does so in obedience to the strictest law and the most
inexorable necessity; therefore, that wherever and however
the corporeal conditions are produced, sensation
and consciousness will awaken. For we believe in a
world governed by law. But the mystery is in no way
lessened by this, and the modern theory of evolution
throws no light into this utterly impenetrable darkness.
In the first place, the whole idea of <q>explaining</q> in
terms of <q>evolution</q> is a futile one. The process of
becoming is pictured as a simple process of cumulation,
a gradual increase of intensities, while the business is
really one of change in quality and the introduction of
what is new. In the second place, the occurrence even
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
of the first and most primitive sensation contains the
whole riddle concentrated on a single point. In the
third place, the riddle meets us anew and undiminished
in every developing individual. For to say that the
physical inwardness, once it has arisen, is <q>transmitted,</q>
is not an explanation but merely an admission that the
riddle exists. And the idea that the psychical is
just a penumbra or shadow of reality, which comes of
itself and so to speak gratis, is quite inadmissible from
the point of view of strict natural science. There are
no longer <foreign rend='italic'>luxus</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>lusus naturæ</foreign>. Reality cannot
throw a <q>shadow.</q> According to the principles of the
conservation of matter and energy, we must be able to
show whence it gets the so-called shadow, and with
what it compensates for it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Pre-eminence of Consciousness.</head>

<p>
But we have already spent too much time over this
naïve mode of looking at things, which, though it
professes to place things in their true light, in reality
distorts them and turns them upside down. As if
this world of the external and material, all these bodies
and forces, were our first and most direct data, and
were not really all derived from, and only discoverable
by, consciousness. We have here to do with the
ancient view of all philosophy and all reflection in
general, although in modern days it has taken its
place as a great new discovery even among naturalists
themselves, by whom it is extolled and recognised as
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
<q>the conquest of materialism.</q> Such exaggerated
emphasis tends to conceal the fact that this truth
has been regarded as self-evident from very early
times.
</p>

<p>
What is a body, extension, movement, colour, smell
and taste? What do I possess of them, or know of
them, except through the images, sensations and feelings
which they call up in my receptive mind? No
single thing wanders into me as itself, or reveals itself
to me directly; only through the way in which they
affect me, the peculiar changes which they work in
me, do things reveal to me their existence and their
special character. I have no knowledge of an apple-tree
or of an apple, except through the sense perceptions
they call up in me. But these sense perceptions,
what are they but different peculiar states of my
consciousness, peculiar determinations of my mind? I
see that the tree stands there, but what is it to see?
What is the perception of a colour, of light, of shade,
and their changes? Surely only a peculiar change of
my mind itself, a particular state of stimulus and
awareness brought about in myself. And in the same
way I can feel that the apple lies there. But what is
the perception of resistance, of hardness, of impenetrability?
Nothing more than a feeling, a change in my
psychical state, which is unique and cannot be described
in terms of anything but itself. Even as regards
<q>attraction and repulsion,</q> external existence only
reveals itself to us through changes in the mind and
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
consciousness, which we then attribute to a cause outside
ourselves.
</p>

<p>
It is well enough known that this simple but incontrovertible
fact has often led to the denial of the
existence of anything outside of ourselves and our
consciousness. But even if we leave this difficult subject
alone, it is quite certain that, if the question as
to the pre-eminence of consciousness and its relation
to external things is to be asked at all, it should be
formulated as follows, and not conversely: <q>How can
I, starting from the directly given reality and certainty
of consciousness and its states, arrive at the certainty
and reality of external things, substances, forces, physics
and chemistry?</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Creative Power of Consciousness.</head>

<p>
To this insight into the underivability and pre-eminence
of consciousness over the world of external
reality there must be added at this stage a recognition
of its peculiar creative character. We have here to
recognise that consciousness itself creates its world,&mdash;that
is, the world that becomes our own through actual
experience, possession, and enjoyment. We are led to this
position even by the conception now current in natural
science of the world as it is, not as it is mirrored in
consciousness, and the theory of the <q>subjectivity of
sensory qualities.</q> The qualities which we perceive in
things through the senses are <q>subjective</q>; philosophy
has long taught that, and now natural science teaches
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
it too. That is to say, these qualities are not actually
present in the things themselves; they are rather the
particular responses which our consciousness makes to
stimuli. Take, for instance, tone or colour. What we
call tone or sound is not known to acoustics. That takes
cognisance only of vibrations and the conditions of
vibration in elastic bodies, which, by means of the ear
and the nerves of hearing, become a stimulus of consciousness.
Consciousness <q>responds</q> to this stimulus
by receiving a sense-impression of hearing. But in
this, obviously, there is nothing of the nature of oscillations
and vibrations, but something quite different.
What outside of us is nothing more than a complex
process of movement according to mathematical conditions,
blossoms within us to a world of sound, tone,
and music. The world itself is soundless, toneless.
And the same is true of light and colour; <q>light</q> and
<q>blue</q> are nothing in themselves&mdash;are not properties
of things themselves. They are only the infinitely
rapid movements of an infinitely delicate substance,
the ether. But when these meet our consciousness,
they spin themselves within us into this world of light
and colour, of brilliance and beauty. Thus without us
there is a world of a purely mathematical nature,
without quality, charm, or value. But the world we
know, the world of sound, light, and colour, of all
properties whatsoever, of the ugly or the beautiful, of
pain and pleasure, is in the most real sense the product
of consciousness itself, a creation which, incited by
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
something outside of itself and of a totally different
nature, which we can hardly call <q>world,</q> evolves out
of itself and causes to blossom. No part of this
creation is given from without; not the blue of the
heavens, for outside of us there is no colour, only
vibrations of the ether; not the gold of the sun nor
the red glory of the evening sky. External nature is
nothing more than the stimulus, the pressure upon
the mind, which liberates from its depths the peculiar
reactions and responses to this stimulus, and calls them
forth from its own treasure-stores. Certainly in this
creating the consciousness is entirely dependent on the
impressions stamped on it from outside, and to that
extent upon <q>experience.</q> But it is by no means a
<foreign rend='italic'>tabula rasa</foreign>, and a merely passive mirror of the outer
world, for it translates the stimulus thus received into
quite a different language, and builds up from it a new
reality, which is quite unlike the mathematical and
qualityless reality without. And this activity on the
part of consciousness begins on the very lowest stages.
The simplest perception of light or colour, the first
feeling of pleasure or discomfort, is a reaction of the
psychical, which brings about something entirely new
and unique. <q>The spirit is never passive.</q>
</p>

<p>
That the psychical is not derivable from the physical,
that it does not arise out of it, is not secondary to it,
but pre-eminent over it, is not passive but creative;
so much we have already gained to set over against
naturalism. But its claims are even more affected
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
by the fact of real psychical causality. We need
not here concern ourselves with the difficult question,
whether the mind can of itself act upon the body,
and through it upon the external world. But in the
logical consistence of naturalism there was implied
not only a negative answer to this last question,
but also a denial of the causality of the psychical,
even within itself and its own domain. This is
well illustrated in the figure of the cloud shadows.
In consciousness state follows upon state, a upon b, b
upon c. According to naturalism, b is not really the
result of a, nor c of b, for in that case there would be
independence of phenomena, and distinctness of laws in
the psychical. But as all the states, a, b, and c, of the
cloud shadows, depend upon states <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>, of the
clouds themselves, but do not themselves form a concatenation
of causes, so all the states of the mind
depend upon those of the body, in which alone there
is a true chain of causes because they alone have true
reality.
</p>

<p>
This is a complete distortion of the facts of the case.
It would never be possible to persuade oneself or any
one else that the arm, for instance, did not bend simply
because we willed that it should. And it is still less
possible to doubt that there are sequences of causes
within the psychical, that in the world of thought and
feeling, of desire and will, one thing calls up another,
awakes it, impels it onwards, and influences it. Indeed,
the mode of influence is peculiarly rich, subtle, and
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
certain. Mental images and experiences arouse joy or
sorrow, admiration or repulsion. One image calls up
another, forces it to appear according to quite peculiar
laws, or may crowd it out. Feelings call up desires,
desires lead to determination. Good news actually
causes joy, this is actually strengthened to willing, and
the new situation gives rise to actual resolves. All this
is so obvious and so unquestionable that no naturalism
can possibly prevail against it. It has also long been
made the subject of special investigation and carefully
regulated experiment, and it is one of the chief
subjects of modern psychological science. And especially
as regards the different forms of <q>association of
ideas,</q> the particular laws of this psychical causality
have been established.
</p>

<p>
It cannot be denied, however, that this psychology of
association has itself in a deeper sense certain dangers
from the point of view of the freedom of the mind, and
it is apt to lead, not indeed to naturalistic conceptions,
but to views according to which the <q>soul</q> is reduced
to the level of a passive frame and stage, so to speak, for
the exhibition of mental mechanics and statics.
<q>Ideas</q> or thoughts, or states of feelings, are sometimes
represented almost as actual little realities, which
come and go in accordance with their own laws of
attraction and repulsion, unite and separate again, by
virtue of a kind of mental gravitation, move and crowd
one another, so that one must almost say <q>it thinks,</q>
as one says <q>it rains,</q> and not <q>the mind thinks</q> or <q>I
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
think.</q> But more of this later. This psychological
orderliness is in sharp antagonism to pure naturalism.
It describes the laws of a sequence of causes, which have
nothing to do with the physical, chemical, or mechanical,
and clearly establishes the uniqueness, independence,
and underivability of the psychical as contrasted with
the physical.
</p>

<p>
The individuality and incommensurability of this
psychical causality shows itself in another series of
factors which make even the <emph>form</emph> of the psychical
process quite distinctive, and produce phenomena which
have no parallel in the material sequences of the world,
indeed, conflict with all its fundamental laws. The
great psychologists of to-day, Wundt in particular, and
James, have frequently emphasised these factors. We
can only briefly call attention to a few points, as, for
instance, Wundt's theory of the creative resultants
through which the psychical processes show themselves
to be quite outside of the scope of the laws of
equivalence which hold good in the physical. If, in the
realm of the corporeal, two components of energy, a and
b, come together, they unite in a common resultant c,
which includes in part a new movement, in part transformation
into heat, but always in such a way that c
remains equal to a and b. But it is otherwise in the
psychical. Here there occurs what may be called an increase
(and a qualitative change) of the psychical energy.
If we take the notes, c, e, and g, and call the sensation- and
perception-value of the individual notes x, y, z,
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
when they come together, the resulting sensation-value
is by no means simply x + y + z, for a <q>harmony</q>
results of which the effect is not only greater than the
mere sum of x + y + z, but is <emph>qualitatively</emph> different.
This is true of all domains of psychical experience. The
parallels from mechanical operation cannot be applied
in any case. These only supply inadequate analogies and
symbols which never really represent the actual state of
the case.
</p>

<p>
Let us take, for instance, a motive, <hi rend='italic'>m</hi>, that impels us
towards a particular action, and another, <hi rend='italic'>n</hi>, that
hinders us. If these meet in us, the result is not
simply a weakening of the power of the one, and a
remaining motive of the strength of <hi rend='italic'>m</hi>
minus <hi rend='italic'>n</hi>. The
meeting of the two creates an entirely new and
peculiar mental situation, which gives rise to conflict
and choice, and the resultant victorious motive is
never under any circumstances <hi rend='italic'>m-n</hi>, but may be a
double or three-fold <hi rend='italic'>m</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>n</hi>.
Thus, in the different
aspects of psychical activity, there are factors which
make it impossible to compare these with other activities,
remove them outside of the scope of the law of the
equivalence of cause and effect, and prove that there
is self-increase and growth on the part of psychical
energies. And all such phenomena lead us away from
the standpoint of any mere theory of association.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Activity of Consciousness.</head>

<p>
Naturalism takes refuge in the doctrine of association,
when it does not attain anything with its first
claims, and applies this theory in such a way that it
seems possible from this standpoint to interpret
mental processes as having an approximate resemblance
to mechanically and mathematically calculable
phenomena. As in physics the molecules and atoms, so
here the smallest mental elements, the simplest units of
feeling are sought for, and from their relations of attraction
and repulsion, their groupings and movements,
it is supposed that the whole mental world may be
constructed up to its highest contents, will, ideals, and
development of character. But even the analogy, the
model which is followed, and the fact that a model is
followed at all, show that this method is uncritical and
not unprejudiced. What reason is there for regarding
occurrences in the realm of physics as a <emph>norm</emph> for the
psychical? Why should one not rather start from the
peculiar and very striking differences between the two,
from the primary and fundamental fact, not indeed
capable of explanation, but all the more worthy of
attention on that account, that there is an absolute
difference between physical occurrences and mental
behaviour, between physical and mental causality?
These most primitive and simplest mental elements
which are supposed to float and have their being within
the mind as in a kind of spiritual ether are not atoms
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
at all, but deeds, actions, performances. The laws of
the association of ideas are not the laws of a mental
chemistry, but laws of mental behaviour; very fixed
and reliable laws, but still having to do with modes
of behaviour. Their separating and uniting, their
relations to one another, their grouping into unities,
their <q>syntheses,</q> are not automatic permutations and
combinations, but express the <hi rend='italic'>activity</hi> of a thinking
intelligence. Not even the simplest actual synthesis
comes about of itself, as psychologists have shown by a
neat illustration.
</p>

<p>
[Illustration: Square <hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>,
next to smaller square <hi rend='italic'>b</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>.
Above them are horizontal lines <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
the same lengths as the widths of the squares below them.
Caption: <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> only associated.
Squares of <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> in
juxtaposition.]
</p>

<p>
[Illustration: Square <hi rend='italic'>c</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>.
Above it is horizontal line <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>,
the same length as the width of the square below it.
Caption: <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> really synthetised
to <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>. Square of <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> +
<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>
as a true unity = <hi rend='italic'>c</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>.]
</p>

<p>
Given that, through some association, the image of
the line <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> calls up that of
the line <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, and both are
associatively ranged together, we have still not made the
real synthesis <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> + <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>
= <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>. For to think of <hi rend='italic'>a</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> side
by side is not the same thing as thinking of <hi rend='italic'>c</hi>, as we
shall readily see if we square them. The squares of <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> thought of beside one another, that is,
<hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, are
something quite different from the square of the really
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
synthetised <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, which is
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> +
<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> =
<hi rend='italic'>a</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> +
2<hi rend='italic'>ab</hi> +
<hi rend='italic'>b</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>,
or <hi rend='italic'>c</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'> 2</hi>.
This requires quite a new view, a spontaneous
synthesis, which is an action and not a mere experience.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Ego.</head>

<p>
It was customary in earlier psychology, as it still is
in all apologetic psychology, to regard the soul as a
unified, immaterial, indivisible and therefore indestructible
<emph>substance</emph>, as a monad, which, as a unity without
parts, superior to its own capacities and the changes of
its states, is at all times one and the same subject.
Many attempts have been made since the time of
Plotinus to accumulate proofs of this substantial unity.
We may leave this question untouched here, and need
not even inquire whether these definitions are not
themselves things of the external world employed as
images and analogies and pushed too far. But there
are three factors which may be established in regard to
the psychical in spite of all naturalistic opposition;
and those who have attempted to find proofs for the
traditional idea we have noted, have usually really had
these three in mind, and quite rightly so: they are,
self-consciousness, the unity of consciousness, and
the consciousness of the ego.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Self-Consciousness.</head>

<p>
1. Our consciousness is not merely a knowledge of
many individual things, the possession of concrete and
abstract, particular or general conceptions and ideas,
the cherishing of sensations, feelings and the like. We
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
not only know, but we know that we know, and we can
ponder in thought over the very fact that we are able
thus to reflect in thought. Thought can turn its
attention upon itself, can establish that it takes place,
and how it runs its course, can reflect upon the forms
in which it expresses itself, its powers, its laws,
possibilities, and limits, and can ponder over the general
nature of thought and the contingent individual nature
of the particular thinking subject. (The very possibility
and preliminary condition of moral freedom is
implied in this.) How naturalism is to do justice to
this fact it is not easy to see. Even if it were possible
that the mental content was gained through mere
experience, that comparisons, syntheses, and abstractions
were formed simply according to the laws of association,
and that these were sublimed and refined to general
ideas, and could grow into axioms of logic and of
geometry, or crystallise into necessary and axiomatic
principles&mdash;none of which can happen&mdash;yet it would
always be a knowledge of something. But how this
something could be given to itself remains undiscoverable.
The soul is a <hi rend='italic'>tabula rasa</hi> and a mere mirror,
says this theory. But it would still require to show
how the silver layer behind the mirror began to see
itself in the mirror.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Unity of Consciousness.</head>

<p>
2. The same holds true of the unity of consciousness,
of which we are directly convinced. It is quite inexplicable
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
if consciousness is a function of the extended and
divisible physical substratum which is built up of
nerve-cells and nerve-fibres. And yet this unity is the
fundamental condition of our whole inner life.
</p>

<p>
Even the facts of association demonstrate it. Two
images could not come together, the one could not call
up the other, if they were not possessed in the same
consciousness, and could unite in it. It is the preliminary
condition of every higher mode of thought,
of every relating of things, of every comparison and
abstraction. No judgment can be formed, no conclusion
drawn without this. How could a predicate become
associated with its subject, or a principal clause with
its subordinate clause, if they were in separate consciousnesses,
and how could the conclusion be drawn
from them?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Consciousness of the Ego.</head>

<p>
3. This unified self-consciousness is consciousness
of the ego. It is only by means of an artificial
abstraction that we can leave out of account in the
consideration of processes of thought the peculiar factor
of personal relationship that absolutely attaches to
every thought within us. There are no thoughts in
general that play their part of themselves alone. <q>It</q>
never <q>thinks</q> in me. On the contrary, all sensation,
thought, and will has in every human being a peculiar
central relationship to which we refer when we say <q>my
idea,</q> <q>my sensation.</q> What the <q>I</q> is cannot be
defined. It is that through which the relation of all
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
experiences and actions is referred to a point, and
through which the treasuring of them for good or ill,
the appreciation, the valuation of them is accomplished.
And it plays its part even in the case of cold and
indifferent items of knowledge. For instance, that
twice two are four is not simply a perception, it is <emph>my</emph>
perception. Of the ego itself nothing more can be said
than that it is the thought of me as the subject of all
experience, willing, and action, and if we try to take
hold of it nothing more than this formula remains.
Yet the fact that the ego is the subject of all this, gives
conduct, will, and experience that peculiar character
which distinguishes them from mere action and reaction.
For it is directly certain that all the
psychical contents are not only co-existences in one
consciousness but that they are possessed by it.
</p>

<p>
Thus in summing up we have to say, that it is through
the ego that all psychical activities and experiences
are centred and related, that the ego is itself the
point of relation, that it is the reason of the unity of
consciousness and of the possibility of self-consciousness,
and that in all this it is the most certain reality,
without which the simplest psychical life would be
impossible. At the same time, it is difficult to state
what the <q>ego</q> is in itself, apart from the effects in
which it reveals itself.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. Freedom Of Spirit.</head>

<p>
The consciousness of the ego leads us naturally to
the consciousness of freedom. Freedom of the mind is
no simple idea; it embraces various contents which
bear the relation of stages to one another, and each
higher stage presupposes the one below it. Freedom
is, first of all, the word which expresses that we are
really agents, not mere points of transit for phenomena
foreign to ourselves, but starting-points of phenomena
peculiar to us, actual causes, beings who are able to
initiate activity, to control things and set them in
motion. Here the whole question of freedom becomes
simply the question of the reality and causality of the
will. Is the will something really factual, or is it only
the strange illusion to which Spinoza, for instance,
referred in his illustration of the flying stone? It
would be purely an illusion of that kind if materialism
were the true interpretation of things, and the psychical
were nothing more than an accompaniment of other
<q>true</q> realities, and even if the doctrine of psychical
atoms we have already mentioned were correct.
</p>

<p>
This idea of freedom speedily rises to a higher plane.
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
Freedom is always freedom from something, in this
case from a compulsion coming from outside, and from
things and circumstances foreign to us. In maintaining
freedom of the mind it is asserted that it can preserve
its own nature and laws in face of external compulsion
or laws, and in face of the merely psychological compulsion
of the <q>lower courses of thought,</q> even from the
<q>half-natural</q> laws of the association of ideas. Thus
<q>freedom</q> is pre-eminently freedom of thought. And
in speaking thus we are presupposing that the mind has
a nature of its own, distinguished even from the purely
psychological nature, and has a code of laws of its
own, lying beyond the scope of all natural laws, which
psychical motives and physical conditions may prevent
it following, but which they can never suspend or pull
down to their own level.
</p>

<p>
<q>Der Mensch ist frei, und wär' er in Ketten geboren.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here at last we arrive at what is so often exclusively,
but erroneously, included under the name of freedom,
or <q>freedom of the will,</q> that is practical freedom, the
freedom to recognise moral laws and ideals, and to
form moral judgments against all psychological compulsion,
and to will to allow ourselves to be determined
by these. From this question of moral freedom
we might finally pass to that with which it is usual
over-hastily to begin: the problem of so-called freedom
of choice, of the <q>equilibrium</q> of the will, a problem
in which are centred all the purely theoretical interests
of the doctrine of the will in general, and ethical
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
interests in particular. The whole domain is so enormous
that we cannot even attempt to sketch it here. The
general bearing of the whole can be made clearest at
the second stage, but we cannot entirely pass over the
first.
</p>

<p>
In this inquiry into the problem of the will it is not
necessary to discuss whether we are able by it to bring
about external effects, movements, and changes in our
bodies. We may postpone this question once more.
The most important part of the problem lies in the
domain of the psychical. To move an arm or a leg is a
relatively unimportant function of the will as compared
with the deliberate adoption of a rule of conduct, with
inward self-discipline, self-culture, and the development
of character.
</p>

<p>
That we <q>will,</q> and what it is to will, cannot really
be demonstrated at all, or defended against attacks.
It simply <emph>is</emph> so. It is a fundamental psychical fact
which can only be proved by being experienced. If
there were anywhere a will-less being, I could not prove
to him that there is such a thing as will, because I
could never make clear to him what will is. And the
theories opposed to freedom of the will cannot be
refuted in any way except by simply saying that they
are false. They do not describe what really takes
place in us. We do not find within ourselves either
the cloud-shadows or the play of psychical, minima
already referred to, with their crowding up of images,
bringing some into prominence and displacing them
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
again while we remain passive&mdash;we find ourselves
<emph>willing</emph>. These theories should at least be able to explain
whence came this marvellous hallucination, this
appearance of will in us, which must have its cause,
and they should also be able to say whence came the
idea of the will. Spinoza's example of the stone, which
seemed to itself to fly when it was simply thrown, does
not meet the facts of the case. If the thrown stone
had self-consciousness, it would certainly not say, <q>I
am flying,</q> but would merely wonder, <q>What has
happened to me suddenly?</q>
</p>

<p>
We cannot demonstrate what will is, we can only
make it clear to ourselves by performing an act of will
and observing ourselves in the doing of it. Let us
compare, for instance, a psychical state which we call
<q>attention</q> with another which we call <q>distraction.</q>
In this last there is a stage where the will rests. There
is actually an uninhibited activity of <q>the lower course
of thought,</q> a disconnected <q>dreaming,</q> a confused
automatic movement of thoughts and feelings according
to purely associative laws. Then suddenly we pull
ourselves together, rouse ourselves out of this state of
distraction. Something new comes into the course of
our thoughts. It is the will. Now there is control
and definite guidance of our thoughts and rejection of
subsidiary association&mdash;ideas that thrust themselves
upon us. Particular thoughts can be selected, particular
feelings or mental contents kept in focus as long
as we desire. In thus selecting and guiding ideas, in
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
keeping them in mind or letting them go, we see the
will in action.
</p>

<p>
This brings us to freedom of thought. This lies in
the fact, not merely that we can think, but that we can
and desire to think rightly, and that we are able to
measure our thoughts by the standard of <q>true</q> or
<q>false.</q> Naturalism is proud of the fact that it
desires nothing more than to search after truth. To
this it is ready to sacrifice all expressions of feeling or
sentiment, and all prejudices. The truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth is its ideal, even if all
pet ideas have to give way before it. It usually
saddles itself with the idea of the good and the beautiful
along with this <q>idea of truth,</q> but is resolved,
since it must soon see for itself that it is able to secure
only a very doubtful basis for these, to sacrifice them to
truth if need be. This is worthy of honour,<note place='foot'>Though
somewhat inconsequent, since at any rate the enthusiasm
for truth could not result from a naturalistic, but only from
some kind of idealistic basis.</note> but it
implies a curious self-deception. For if naturalism be
in the right, thought is not free, and if thought be not
free there can be no such thing as truth, for there can
be no establishing of what truth is.
</p>

<p>
Let us attempt to make this plain in the following
manner: According to the naturalistic-psychological
theory, the play of our thoughts, our impressions of
things and properties, their combination in judgments
or in <q>perceptions,</q> are dependent on physiological
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
processes of the brain, and therefore upon natural laws,
or, according to some, on peculiar attractions and repulsions
among the impressions themselves, regulated by
the laws of association. If that and that only were
the case, I should be able to say that such a conception
was present in my mind, or that this or that thought
had arisen in me, and I might perhaps be able to trace
the connection which made it necessary that it should
arise at that particular time. But every thought would
be equally right. Or rather there could be no question
of right or wrong in the matter at all. I could not
forbid any thought to be there, could not compel it to
make way for another, perhaps exactly its opposite. Yet
I do this continually. I never merely observe what
thoughts are in my own mind or in another's. For I
have a constant ideal, a plumb-line according to which
I measure, or can measure, every train of thought. And
I can compel others to apply this same plumb-line to
their thoughts. This plumb-line is logic. It is the
unique law of the mind itself which concerns itself about
no law of nature or of association whatsoever. And
however mighty a flood of conceptions and associations
may at times pour through me in consequence of various
confused physiological states of excitement affecting
the brain, or in consequence of the fantastic dance of
the associations of ideas, the ego is always able in free
thought to intervene in its own psychical experiences,
and to test which combinations of ideas have been
logically thought out and are therefore right, and
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
which are wrong. It often enough refrains from exercising
this control, leaving the lower courses of thought
free play. Hence the mistakes in our thinking, the
errors in judgment, the thousand inconsistencies and
self-deceptions. But the mind can do otherwise, can
defend itself from interruptions and extraneous influences
by making use of its freedom and of its power
to follow its own laws and no others. It is thus possible
for us to have not only psychical experiences
but knowledge; only in this way can truth be reached,
and error rejected. Thus science can follow a sure
course. Thus alone, for instance, could the great
edifice of geometry and arithmetic have been built up in
its indestructible certainty. The progress from axiom
to theorem and to all that follows is due to free thought,
obeying the laws of inference and demonstration, and
entirely unconcerned about the laws of association
or the natural laws of the nervous agitations, the electric
currents, and other plays of energy which may go on
in the brain at the same time. What have the laws of
the syllogism to do with the temporary states of tension
in the brain, which, if they had free course, would
probably follow lines very different from those of Euclid,
and if they chanced once in a way to follow the right
lines from among the millions of possibilities, would
certainly soon turn to different ones, and could never
examine them to see whether they were right or not.
Thus it is not any highly aspiring emotional desire or
any premature prejudice, but the solid old science
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
of logic that first and most determinedly shuts the
door in face of the claims of naturalism. If we combine
this with what has already been said on page 154,
we shall see how dangerous it would be for naturalism
to be proved right in the dispute; for then it would be
wholly wrong.
</p>

<p>
For, as it is only through the free, thinking mind
that true and false can be distinguished and brought
into relation with things, so only through it can we
have an ideal of truth to be recognised and striven
after, and that spontaneous, pertinacious, searching, following,
and discovering which constitutes science as a
whole and in detail. And in so far as naturalism itself
claims to be nothing more than an attempt towards
this goal, it is itself only possible on the basis of
something which it denies.
</p>

<p>
Freedom of thought is also the most obvious example
of that freedom of the spirit in morally <q>willing,</q> which
it is the business of ethical science to teach and defend.
As in the one case thought shows itself superior to the
physiologically or psychologically conditioned sequence
of its concepts, so the free spirit, in the uniqueness of
its moral laws, reveals itself as lord over all the motives,
the lower feelings of pleasure and pain that have their
play within us. As in the one case it is free to measure
according to the criteria of true or false, and thus is
able to intervene in the sequence of its own conceptions,
correcting and confirming, so in the other it is
able to estimate by the criteria of good or bad. As in
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
the one case it carries within it its own fundamental
laws as logic, so in the other the moral ideals and
fundamental judgments which arise out of its own
being. And in both cases it is free from nature and
natural law, and capable of subordinating nature to its
own rules, in so far as it <q>wills,</q> and of becoming
subordinate to nature&mdash;in erroneous thinking and non-moral
acting&mdash;in so far as it does not will.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Feeling, Individuality, Genius, and Mysticism.</head>

<p>
The four things here mentioned are very closely
associated with one another, especially the second and
third, as is easily perceived, but the second is rooted in
the first. And in the second and third there is already
to be discovered a factor which goes beyond the sphere
of the purely rational, and is no longer accessible to
our comprehension, but carries us over into the sphere
of the fourth. This is really true even of the phenomena
of moral consciousness and moral <q>freedom.</q> In
this quality, and in the ethical ideal of <q>personality,</q>
there is implied something that is inaccessible to a
purely rational consideration, and is directly related to
mystery and divination. (What is <q>personality</q>?
We all feel it. We respect it from the depths of our
soul wherever we meet it. We bow down before it
unconditionally. But what it is no philosophy has ever
yet been able definitely to state. In seeking to comprehend
it intuition and feeling must always play the
largest part.)
</p>

</div>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Feeling.</head>

<p>
It is in the four attributes here emphasised that the
true nature of mind in its underivability and superiority
to all nature first becomes clear. All that we have so far
considered under the name of mind is only preliminary
and leads up to this. All reality of external things is
of little account compared with that of the mind. It
does not occur to any one in practice to regard anything
in the whole world as more real and genuine than his own
love and hate, fear and hope, his pain, from the simplest
discomfort due to a wound to the pangs of conscience
and the gnawings of remorse&mdash;his pleasure, from the
merest comfort to the highest raptures of delight.
This world of feeling is for us the meaning of all
existence. The more we plunge ourselves into it, the
deeper are the intricacies and mysteries it reveals. At
every point underivable and unintelligible in terms of
physiological processes, it reveals itself from stage to
stage as more deeply and wholly unique in its relations,
interactions, and processes, and grows farther and
farther beyond the laboured and insufficient schemes
and formulas under which science desires to range
all psychical phenomena.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Individuality.</head>

<p>
It is especially in <q>feeling</q> that what we call
individuality has its roots. The individual really means
the <q>indivisible,</q> and in the strict sense of the word
need mean nothing more than the ego, and the unity
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
of consciousness of which we have already spoken.
But through a change in the meaning of the word we
have come to mean much more than that by it. This
individuality forces itself most distinctly upon our
attention in regard to prominent and distinguished
persons. It is the particular determination of their
psychical nature that marks them out so distinctly, and
it often rather escapes analysis and characterisation
than is attained by it. <q>Individuum est ineffabile.</q>
It can only be grasped intuitively and by experience.
And people of a non-reflective mood are usually
more successful in understanding it than those who
reflect and analyse. It requires <q>fine feeling,</q> which
knows exactly how it stands towards the person in
question, which yet can seldom give any definite account
of his characteristics. Individuality usually meets us
most obviously in exceptional men, and we are apt to
contrast these with ordinary men. But on closer
examination we see that this difference is only one of
degree. <q>Individuality</q> in a less marked manner
belongs to them all, and where it exists it is a distinctly
original thing, which cannot be derived from its antecedents.
No psyche is simply derivable from other
psyches. What a child receives from its parents by
<q>heredity</q> are factors which, taken together, amount to
more than the mere sum of them. The synthesis of these
is at once the creation of something new and peculiar,
and what has been handed down is merely the building
material. This can be felt in an intensified and striking
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
degree in regard to <q>pronounced individuality,</q> but
careful study will disclose the fact that there are no
men quite alike. This kind of <q>creative synthesis,</q>
that is, the underivability of the individual, was the
element of truth in the mythologies of <q>creationism</q>
held by the Church fathers, or in the theory of the
<q>pre-existence of the soul</q> maintained by Plato and
others.
</p>

<p>
And from this point of view we must safeguard what
has already been said in regard to the culture and
gradual development of our psychical inner nature.
It is true that the <q>soul</q> does not spring up ready-made
in the developing body, lying dormant in it, and
only requiring to waken up gradually. It really
becomes. But the becoming is a self-realisation. It
is not true that it is put together and built up bit by bit
by experience, so that a different being might develop
if the experiences were different. It is undoubtedly
dependent upon experience, impressions, and circumstances,
and without these its development would be
impossible. But these impressions act as a stimulus,
developing only what is previously inherent. They do
not themselves create anything. A characteristic predetermination
restricts the development to comparatively
narrow limits. And this is identical with the
individuality itself. A man may turn out very different
according to circumstances, education, influences. But
he would nevertheless recognise <q>himself</q> under any
circumstances. He will never become anything of which
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
he had not the possibility within him from the very
beginning, any more than the rose will become a
violet if it is nurtured with a different kind of manure.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Genius.</head>

<p>
We cannot venture to say much about genius and the
mystery of it. In it and its creative power something
of the spirit, the nature of the spirit, seems to look up
at us, as we might think of it in itself and apart from
the limits of existence in time and space. It is usually
most obvious and most accessible to us in the domain
of art. But it has its place too in the realm of science.
And it is most of all genius, and therefore most inaccessible
to us ordinary mortals, in the domain of
religion.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Mysticism.</head>

<p>
Even <q>pronounced individuality</q> <q>has an element
of mysticism</q> in it&mdash;of the non-rational, which we feel
the more distinctly the more decidedly we reject all
attempts to make it rational again through crude or
subtle mythologies. This is much more true of genius,
artistic insight, and inspiration. But these are much
too delicate to be exposed to the buffeting of controversy,
much more so the dark and mysterious
boundary region in the life of the human spirit which
we know under the name of mysticism in the true sense,
without inverted commas. It is not a subject that is
adapted for systematic treatment. Where it has been
subjected to it, everything becomes crude and repulsive,
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
a mere caricature of pure mysticism like the recrudescent
occultism of to-day. Therefore it is enough
simply to call the attention of the sympathetic reader
to it and then to pass it by. In face of the witness
borne to it by all that is finest and deepest in history,
especially in the history of religion, naturalism is
powerless.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Mind and Spirit. The Human and the
Animal Soul.</head>

<p>
What is the relation between the human and the
animal mind? This has always been a vital question in
the conflict between naturalism and the religious outlook.
And as in the whole problem of the psychical so
here the interest on both sides has been mainly concentrated
on the question of <q>mortality</q> or <q>immortality.</q>
Man is immortal because he has a soul. Animals <q>have
no souls.</q> <q>Animals also have souls, differing only in
degree but not in substantial nature from the soul of
man: as they are mortal, man must be so too.</q> <q>Animals
have minds: the merely psychical passes away with the
body. But man has spirit in addition. It is imperishable.</q>
These and many other assertions were made on
one side or the other. And both sides made precisely
the same mistake: they made the belief in the immortality
of our true nature dependent upon a proof that
the soul has a physical <q>substantial nature,</q> which
is to be regarded as an indestructible substance, a kind
of spiritual atom. And on the other hand they overlooked
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
the gist of the whole matter, the true starting-point,
which cannot be overlooked if the religious
outlook is not to be brought into discredit. It is
undoubtedly a fundamental postulate, and one which
the religious outlook cannot give up, that the human
spirit is more than all creatures, and is in quite a
different order from stars, plants, and animals. But
absolutely the first necessity from the point of view of
the religious outlook is to establish the incomparable
value of the human spirit; the question of its <q>substantial
nature</q> is in itself a matter of entire indifference.
The religious outlook observes that man can will good
and can pray, and no other creature can do this.
And it sees that this makes the difference between two
worlds. Whether the bodily and mental physics in
both these worlds is the same or different, is to it a
matter rather of curiosity than of importance.
</p>

<p>
What occurs or does not occur within the animal
mind is, as a matter of fact, wholly hidden from us.
We have no way of determining this except by analogy
with ourselves, and therefore our idea of it is necessarily
anthropomorphic. And apologists are undoubtedly
right when they maintain that this is far too much the
case. To reach a more unprejudiced attitude towards the
customary anthropomorphisation of animals, it is profitable
to study Wundt's lectures on <q>The Human and
the Animal Mind</q> (see especially Lecture XX.). Perhaps
it is true that, notwithstanding all the much-praised
cleverness, intelligence and teachableness of
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
elephants, dogs, and chimpanzees, they are incapable of
forming <q>general ideas,</q> <q>rules,</q> and <q>laws,</q> of
forming judgments in the strict sense, and constructive
syllogisms, that they have only associations of ideas,
and expectations of similar experience, but no thinking
in conceptual terms, and cannot perceive anything
general or necessary, that they recognise <hi rend='italic'>à posteriori</hi>
but not <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi>, as Leibnitz supposed, and that they
form only perceptual inferences, not judgments from
experience. But it is not easy to see that this contributes
anything of importance to our problem. It
does not even help us in regard to the interesting
question of a physical guarantee for the indestructibility
of the soul. For even if the psychical acts of animals
were fewer and less important than they are admitted
to be, they have certainly sensations, images, feelings,
pleasure, pain, and desire. All these are of a psychical
nature, immaterial, and underivable from the material.
And it is difficult to see, for instance, why the forming
of judgments should be regarded as more durable and
indestructible than sensation and desire. The difference
lies higher than this,&mdash;not in the fact that man has a few
<q>capacities</q> more than the animal, but in the difference
in principle, that the psychical in man can be developed
to spirit, and that this is impossible anywhere else. The
very example that naturalism loves to cite in its own
favour makes its error clear. It asks whether the
difference, let us say, between a Fuegian and one of the
higher mammals such as an ape, is not much less than
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
that between a Fuegian and a European. This sounds
obvious, if we measure simply by habits, morals, and
possibly also the content of feeling and imagination in
a <q>savage</q> as we find him. And yet it is obviously
false. I can <emph>train</emph> a young ape or an elephant, can
teach it to open wine-bottles and perform tricks. But
I can <emph>educate</emph> the child of the savage, can develop in
him a mental life equal in fineness, depth, and energy,
frequently more than equal, to that of the average
European, as the mission to the Eskimos and to the
Fuegians proves, and as Darwin frankly admitted.
Psychical capacity is nothing more than raw material.
It is in the possibility of raising this to the level of
spirit, of using the raw material to its purpose, that
the absolute difference, the impassable gulf between
man and animals lies.
</p>

<p>
Even in animals there is a primitive thinking, rising
above the level of blind instinct. But it can neither
be schooled, nor is it capable of developing even the
crudest beginnings of science. Even the animal has a
sensory satisfaction in colour, form and tone (not nearly
so much, however, as the theory of sexual selection requires
us to suppose). But art, even the most rudimentary
self-expression of the spirit upon this basis, is wholly
sealed to it. Even the animal possesses strong altruistic
instincts, impulses towards companionship, pairing,
and caring for its young, and some have seen in this the
beginnings of morality. But morality is a matter of
the spirit, which begins with the idea of duty and rises
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
to the recognition of an ideal of life. Nowhere else do
we see so directly and emphatically the incomparability
of the natural-psychical and the spiritual as in the idea
of duty and an ideal of life, although the contrast is
equally great at all points of the spiritual life.
</p>

<p>
Finally and highest of all, we have the capacity of
the human spirit to rise to religion and the greatest
heights of feeling. In science and art, in morality and
religion, the spirit possesses itself. And as such it is a
unique and strange guest in this world, absolutely
incomparable with anything beneath or around it. It
may, perhaps, be true that the psychical difference
between the ape and man is smaller than that between
the ape and unicellular organisms (though we really
can know nothing about that). But nowhere in the
animal world does the psychical overstep the limits of
purely natural existence, of striving after and being
prompted by the directly and purely natural ends of a
vegetative and animal instinctive life, physical pleasure,
self-preservation, and the maintenance of the species.
</p>

<p>
And there is more than this. However different the
psychical equipment may be at different animal stages,
it has one thing in common in them all, it is absolutely
limited to what is given it by nature. An animal species
may last for a million years. But it has no history.
It is and remains the same history-less natural product.
In this respect the animal is not a step in advance of
the stone or the crystal. The only thing it can achieve
is to express more or less perfectly the character of the
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
species. This is the utmost height of its capacity. But
for man this is only the starting-point, and the really
human begins just there. What is implicit in him as
<hi rend='italic'>homo sapiens</hi>, a member of a zoological order, is nothing
more than the natural basis upon which, in human and
individual history, he may build up an entirely unique
and new creation, an upper story: the world and life
of the spirit.
</p>

<p>
It is also erroneous to regard the gradual development
of the psychical capacities at the different levels
of animal evolution as the development of and
preparation for the human spirit. It is not the
spirit, but the raw material of it, that is thus being
prepared and developed. It is as if, in the history
of colour manufacture, an <q>evolution</q> of colour were
taking place. The quality of the colour gradually
becomes better and better. Each generation learns to
make it purer and more brilliant. But the painting
which is painted with the most brilliant colour cannot
be regarded as a link in the evolutionary sequence, and
is certainly not the crown and culmination of the
pigment; the latter is only the gradual perfecting of
a necessary preliminary condition.
</p>

<p>
It is only of secondary interest to point out the
immense leaps in the evolution of colour and colour-technique,
and especially the vast difference between the
last stage and the one before it, or, to drop the metaphor,
the enormous psychological differences between
the animal and the human mind.
</p>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<p>
There is no doubt that an apologetic which interests
itself in such matters would find abundant opportunity
for work, and could find a powerful argument against a
too hasty naturalism in the differences between animal
and human psychical capacities, which have been recognised
much more sanely and clearly through recent
investigation than they usually were in earlier times.
But the question has no special interest for us here.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Personality.</head>

<p>
In as far as man is endowed with a capacity for
spiritual life and spiritual possession, he is likewise
destined for personality. This includes and designates
everything that expresses the peculiar dignity of
human nature. Personality is a word which gives us
an inward thrill. It expresses what is most individual
in us, what is set before us, our highest task and the
inmost tendency of our being. What is personality?
Certainly something which is only a rudiment in us at
birth, and is not then realised, and at the same time an
ideal which we feel more or less indistinctly, but
without being able to outline it clearly. To exhaust
the idea as far as possible is the task of ethical science.
But one thing at any rate we can affirm about it with
certainty: it is absolutely bounded off from the whole
world and all existence as a self-contained and independent
world in itself. The more we become persons,
the more clearly, definitely, and indissolubly we raise
ourselves with our spiritual life and spiritual possessions
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
out of all the currents of natural phenomena, the
more do we cease to be mere modes of a general existence
and happening that flows about us, and in which
we would otherwise float with vaguely defined outlines.
A microcosm forms itself in contradistinction to the
macrocosm, and a unity, a monad, arises, in regard to
which there is now warrant for inquiring into its duration
and immortality as compared with the stream of
general becoming and passing away. For what does it
matter to religion whether, in addition to physical indivisible
atoms, there are spiritual ones which, by reason
of their simplicity, are indestructible? But that the
unities which we call personalities are superior to all
the manifoldness and diversity of the world, that they
are not fleeting fortuitous formations among the many
which evolution is always giving rise to and breaking
down again, but that they are the aim and meaning of
all existence, and that as such they are above the
common lot of all that has only a transient meaning
and a temporal worth&mdash;to inquire into all this and to
affirm it is religion itself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Parallelism.</head>

<p>
The independence and underivability of the psychical,
the incomparability of its uniformities with those of
mechanical or physico-chemical laws, has proved itself
so clear and incontrovertible, notwithstanding all the
distortions of naturalism, that it is now regarded as a
self-evident fact, not only among philosophers and
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
epistemologists, and technical psychologists, but for the
last decade even among all thinking men, and <q>materialism</q>
is now an obsolete position. It was too
crude and too contrary to all experience to define the
relation between physical and mental, as if the latter
were a mere secretion of the former, although a very
subtle one, or a mere epi-phenomenon of it, in such a
way that all reality and effectiveness was on the side of
the physical.
</p>

<p>
In place of this, another theory has become widespread,
which claims to define the relation of the two
series of phenomena better and more adequately:
the theory of psychophysical parallelism. It is not
new. There are occasional indications of it even in
Aristotle's psychology. It was suggested by Descartes
in his automaton theory, by the occasionalists in
their parable of the two watches running in exact
agreement; it was developed by Spinoza and Leibnitz,
and refined by the idealistic philosophers, by Schopenhauer,
Fechner, and the modern psychologists. The
form in which it is most prevalent now is that given to
it by Spinoza, and he is usually referred to in connection
with it. Its general tenor is as follows: The
physical cannot be referred back to the psychical, nor
the psychical to the physical. Both orders of phenomena
run side by side as parallels that never separate.
Both represent a concatenation of causes complete in
itself, that is never broken, or interrupted, or completed.
And in both there is real causality. Thought
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
really causes thoughts and feelings. Movement really
causes movements. But the one series is always strictly
correlated with the other, and corresponds with it.
And thus all existence is double, and man is an obvious
illustration of this. To every thought, feeling, or
exercise of will there corresponds some excitement,
movement or change in the body. I will: my arm moves.
Subtle nervous processes run their course in my brain,
and I think. That I will has its sufficient reasons, its
causes lie entirely in the preceding state of my mind,
in motives of feeling, in ideas which again have their
efficient causes in a previous psychical condition, and so
on. And that my arm moves has its efficient cause in
the stored-up energies of the muscle-substance, in the
stimulus and impulse conveyed by the motor nerve
from the brain. And these conditions have their purely
physiological causes and reasons again in preceding
purely physiological states and processes. (It goes
without saying that a mechanical theory of life is the
necessary presupposition of this parallelistic theory.)
But both sets of processes correspond exactly one to
another, and the first is only the inner aspect of the
second, and the second the outer aspect of the first.
Thus it is quite true that my arm moves when I will.
But in reality it is quite as true to say that when
my arm moves I will. But we must not substitute
<q>because</q> for <q>when.</q> This theory must
maintain, and does maintain, that even the most
abstract and subtle ideas, the deepest processes of
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
consciousness, have some corresponding bodily processes,
either in the brain or in the nervous substance generally,
and, on the other hand, that no physical process is
without this psychical inwardness. The result is that
this inwardness and soul are attributed also to the
purely material world, the world of <q>dead</q> matter.
In this way it is believed that everything gets its due;
the thorough mechanical explicability of bodily phenomena,
and the law of the conservation of energy and of
matter, and, on the other hand, very decisively also, the
independence and uniqueness of law which can no
longer be denied to the psychical. And from this
latter standpoint sharp protests are raised against all
materialistic distortions. The only thing denied is the
old idea of the <q>influxus physicus,</q> the idea, that is,
that mind can operate beyond itself and take effect on
the physical world, and conversely the physical world
upon it. This again is regarded as a breach of the law
of the conservation of energy. For if the bodily affects
consciousness, then at a given moment a certain amount
of energy must be transformed into something that is
not energy. And if consciousness affects the bodily, a
process of movement must suddenly occur, for which
no previous equivalent of energy can be shown.
</p>

<p>
This standpoint is most impressively set forth in
Paulsen's widely read <q>Introduction to Philosophy.</q>
The same ideas form the central feature in the work of
Fechner, which is having such a marked renaissance
to-day.
</p>

<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>

<p>
It seems as though all higher estimates of spirit, even
the religious estimate, could quite well rest upon this
basis. For full scope is here given to the idea that
mind and the mental sciences have their own particular
field. God, as the absolute all-consciousness
and self-consciousness, comprehending within Himself
all individual consciousness, is thought of as the eternal
correlate of this universe in space. And the theory has
room also for a belief in immortality. Of all imaginative
attempts to make the idea of immortality clear
and possible, undoubtedly that of Fechner is the
grandest and most effective. And it, too, is based
entirely upon the idea of parallelism. (Yet as a matter
of fact it could be shown that neither mortality
nor immortality really fit into the scheme of this
conception.)
</p>

<p>
Though its main features are very similar as set
forth by its various champions, this theory differs
according to the way in which this astonishing and
mysterious co-ordination, this parallelism itself, is explained.
How is it that <q>thought</q> and <q>extension</q>
can correspond to one another?
</p>

<p>
The answer may be either naïvely dogmatic, that
this is one of the great riddles of the universe, and that
we must simply take it for granted. Others declare
with Spinoza that the two series of phenomena are
only the two sides of one and the same fundamental
being and happening, which may be designated as
<foreign rend='italic'>natura sive deus</foreign>, and that what is inwardly unified
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
expresses itself outwardly in these two forms of being.
But because both sides, thought and extension, are only
expressions of one and the same fundamental substance,
they correspond exactly to one another. The best
illustration of this is Fechner's simile of the curved
line. It is concave on one side, convex on the other,
and thus entirely different on the two sides. But at
every point the concavity corresponds exactly to the
convexity. And this is possible because the two are
the inner and the outer aspects of the same line.
</p>

<p>
Others, again, go back to the fundamental ideas of
critical idealism, and declare the whole extended world
accessible to the senses and the mechanical-physical
nexus of cause and phenomena, to be simply the form
of appearance in which the fundamentally spiritual
existence presents itself to our senses. Body, movement,
physiological processes, are all nothing more than
the will, to speak with Fichte and Schopenhauer, or
the idea, or the spirit itself, which appears thus to
sensory beings. Other theories, some of them new, are
also put forward.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>No Parallelism.</head>

<p>
For a long time it seemed as if the theory of parallelism
was to gain general acceptance. One might
write a whole history of the gradually increasing
criticisms of, and reactions from the academic theories
which had become almost canonical. But we may here
confine ourselves to the most general of the objections
to the parallelistic theory. They apply to the general
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
idea of parallelism itself, and affect the different standpoints
of the parallelists in different degrees. The
theory in no way corresponds to what we find in ourselves
from direct experience. It is only with the
greatest difficulty that we can convince ourselves that
our arm moves only when and not because we will.
The consciousness of being, through the will, the actual
cause of our own bodily movements is so energetic and
direct and certain, that it maintains its sway in spite
of all objections, and confuses the argument even of
the parallelists themselves. Usually after they have
laid the foundations of a purely parallelistic theory, they
abandon it again as quickly as possible, and revert to
the expressions and images of ordinary thought. Indeed
we have no clearer and more certain example of
causality in general than in our own capacity for controlling
changes in our own bodies. Further, a very
fatal addition and burdensome accessory of the parallelistic
theory is involved in the two corollaries it has
above and beneath it. On the one hand there is the
necessity for attributing soul to everything. These
mythologies of atom-souls, molecule-souls, this hatred
and love which are the inner aspects even of the simple
facts of attraction and repulsion among the elements,
fit better into the nature-philosophy of Empedocles
and Anaxagoras than into ours. The main support,
indeed the sole support, of this position is that this
world of the infinitely little cannot be brought under
control as far as its <q>soul</q> is concerned. Thus we can
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
impute <q>a soul</q> to it without danger. On the other
hand, there is a difficulty which made itself felt even in
regard to Spinoza's system. All bodily processes must
have psychical processes corresponding to them, said
Spinoza. Conversely, all ideas in their turn must have
bodily processes. To the system including all bodily
processes corresponds the sum-total of psychical processes.
This sum-total we call the soul. And in its entirety it is the
<foreign rend='italic'>idea corporis</foreign>. If <q>soul</q> were really
nothing more than this, the theory of parallelism might
be right. But it is more than this. It rises above
itself, and becomes also the <foreign rend='italic'>idea ideæ</foreign>;
it is self-consciousness
and the consciousness of the ego; it makes
its own thought and the laws of it, its feelings and their
intensity&mdash;its experiences in short&mdash;a subject of thought.
How does this fit in with parallelism? Wundt himself,
the most notable modern champion of parallelism,
admits and defines these limits of the parallelistic theory
on both sides.
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, the theory of parallelism, notwithstanding
its opposition to materialism, must presuppose
that localisation of psychical processes of which we
have already spoken, and to which all naturalism
appeals with so much emphasis. Because of the fact
that particular psychical functions seem to be limited
to a particular and definable area of the brain-cortex,
or to a spot which could be isolated on a particular
convolution, it seemed as if naturalism could prove that
<q>soul</q> was obviously a function of this particular
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
organ or part of an organ. According to the theory
of parallelism this does not follow. It would assert:
<q>What in one aspect appears to be a psychical process,
appears in another aspect to be a definite physiological
process of the brain.</q> Yet it is clear that in
order to gain support for the doctrine of mutual correspondence,
parallelism has also the same interest
in such localisation. For this is the only method by
which it can empirically control its theory. But this
whole idea of localisation does not hold good to anything
like the extent to which the members of the
naturalistic school are wont to assert that it does.
In regard to this point, too, there has been considerable
disillusioning in recent years. Perhaps all
that can be said is, that localisation of psychical processes
is a fact analogous to the fact that sight is
associated with the optic nerves and hearing with
the auditory nerves. Progressive investigation leads
more and more clearly to the recognition of a fact
which makes localisation comparatively unimportant,
namely, the vicarious functioning of different parts of
the brain. In many cases where this or that <q>centre</q>
is injured, and rendered incapable of function, or even
extirpated, the corresponding part of the mind is by no
means destroyed along with it. At first the mind may
suffer from <q>the effect of shock</q> as the phrase runs,
but gradually it may recover and the same function
may be transferred to another part of the brain, and
there be fulfilled sometimes less perfectly, sometimes
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
quite as perfectly as before. We had to deal with this
fact of vicarious function in discussing the general
theory of life. It is one of the greatest difficulties in
the way of the mechanistic and materialistic theories.
But it must give some trouble to the parallelists too.
</p>

<p>
We need not speak of the wonderful duplication of
all existence which parallelism must establish, though
it is difficult to evade the question how a <foreign rend='italic'>natura sive
deus</foreign> could have come, so superfluously, to say the same
thing twice over. Superfluously, for since both are
alike self-contained and independent of one another,
one can have no need of the other.
</p>

<p>
One objection, however, may be urged against both
parallelism and materialism, which makes them both
impossible, and that is, automatism. Both parallelism
and materialism maintain that the sequence of physical
processes is complete in itself and can be explained in
terms of itself. <emph>All</emph> physical processes! Not only the
movements of the stars, the changes in inanimate
matter, the origin and evolution of the forms of life,
but also what we call actions, for instance the movements
of our arms and our legs, and the complicated
processes affecting the breathing organs and tongue,
which we call <q>speech.</q> Every plant, every animal,
every human being must be as it is and where it is, must
move and act, must perform its functions, which we
explain as due to love or hate, to fear or hope, even if
there were no such thing as sensation, will, idea, neither
love nor hate, fear nor hope. More than this, all that
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
we call history, building towns and destroying them,
carrying on war and concluding peace, uniting into
states and holding national assemblies, going to school
and exercising mouth and tongue, argument, making
books and forming letters, writing Iliads, Bibles, and
treatises on the soul or on free will, holding psychological
congresses and talking about parallelism;&mdash;all this must
have been done even if there had been no consciousness,
no psychical activity in any brain! This is the necessary
consequence to which the theories of parallelism
and materialism lead. If it does not follow, then there
was from the outset no meaning in establishing them.
But the monstrosity of their corollary is fatal to them.
It is idle to set up theories in which it is impossible to
believe.
</p>

<p>
There is another consideration that affects parallelism
alone. Since the theory credits each of the two series with
a closed and sufficient causal sequence, each of which excludes
the other, it does away with causality altogether.
That the one line runs parallel with the other excludes the
idea that a unique system of laws prevails, determining
the character and course of each line. One of the two
lines must certainly be dependent, and one must lead.
Otherwise there can be no distinctness of laws in either.
Let us recall our illustration of the cloud shadows once
more; the changing forms of the shadows correspond
point for point with those of the clouds only because
they are entirely dependent upon them. We may
illustrate it in this way: a parallel may be drawn to
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
an ellipse, it also forms a closed curved line. But
it is by no means again an ellipse, but is an entirely
dependent figure without any formula or law of its own.
Parallelism must make one of its lines the leading one,
which is guided and directed by an actual causal connection
within itself. The other line may then run parallel
with this, but its course must certainly be determined by
the other. And as the line of corporeal processes, with its
inviolable nexus of sequences, is not easily broken, parallelism,
after many hard words against materialism, frequently
returns to that again or becomes inconsistent.
But if one says that the two aspects of phenomena are
only the forms of one fundamental phenomenon, that
means taking away actual causality from both alike, and
leaving only a temporal sequence. For then the actually
real is the hidden something that throws the cloud-shadows
to right and left. But in the sequence of
shadows there is no causal connection, only a series of
states succeeding one another in time, and this points
to a causal connection elsewhere.
</p>

<p>
It is easy enough to find examples to prove that the
mental in us influences the bodily. But the most convincing,
deepest and most trustworthy of these are not
the voluntary actions which are expressed in bodily
movements, nor even the passions and emotions, the joy
which makes our blood circulate more quickly, and the
shame which brings a flush to our foreheads, the suggestions
which work through the mind towards the reviving,
vitalising or healing of the body, but the cold and
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
simple course of logical thought itself. Through logical
thinking we have the power to correct the course
of our conceptions, to inhibit, modify, or logically
direct the natural course, as it would have been had it
been brought about by our preceding physiological and
psychical states, if they were dominant and uncontrolled.
But if so, then we must also have the power,
especially if it be widely true that physiological states
correspond to psychical states, to influence, inhibit,
modify the nerve-processes in our brain, or to liberate
entirely new ones, namely, those that correspond to
the corrected conceptions.
</p>

<p>
The law of the conservation of energy is here applied
in as distorted a sense as we detected before in
regard to the general theory of life. And what
we said there holds good here also. That something
which is in itself not energetic should determine processes
and directions of energy is undoubtedly an
absolute riddle. But to recognise this is less difficult
than to accept the impossibilities which mechanism
and automatism offer us here, even more pronouncedly
than in regard to the theory of life. Perhaps one of
the familiar antinomies of Kant shows us the way,
not, indeed, to find the solution of the riddle, but to
recognise, so to speak, its geometrical position and
associations. We have already seen that inquiry into
the causal conditions of processes lands us in contradictions
of thought, which show us that we can never
really penetrate into the actual state of the matter.
</p>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<p>
Perhaps we have here to do only with the obverse side
of the problem dealt with there. There the chain of
conditions could not be finished because it led on to
infinity, where, however, it was required that it should
be complete. Here again the chain is incomplete. In
the previous case a solution is found through the naïve
proceeding of simply breaking the empirical connection
of conditions and postulating beginnings in time.
In this case, the admission of an <foreign rend='italic'>influxus physicus</foreign>
transforms consciousness almost unnoticed into a mechanically
operative causality. The proper attitude in
both cases is a critical one. We must admit that we
cannot penetrate into the true state of the case, because
the world is deeper than our knowledge, we must
reject parallelism as being, like the <foreign rend='italic'>influxus physicus</foreign>,
an unsatisfactory cutting of the critical knot, and we must
frankly recognise the incontrovertible fact, never indeed
seriously called in question, of the controlling power of
the mind, even over the material.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>The Supremacy of Mind.</head>

<p>
From the standpoint we have now reached we can
look back once more on those troublesome naturalistic
insinuations as to the dependence of the mind upon
the body, which we have already considered. It is
evident to us all that our mental development and
the fate of our inner life are closely bound up with the
states and changes of the body. And it did not need
the attacks and insinuations of naturalism to point this
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
out. But the reasons brought forward by naturalism
are not convincing, and all the weighty facts it adduces
could be balanced by facts equally weighty on the other
side. We have already shown that the apparently dangerous
doctrine of localisation is far from being seriously
prejudicial. But if the dependence of the mind upon
the body be great, that of the body upon the mind is
greater still. Even Kant wrote tersely and drily about
<q>the power of our mind through mere will to be master
over our morbid feelings.</q> And every one who has a
will knows how much strict self-discipline and firm
willing can achieve even with a frail and wretched body,
and handicapped by exhaustion and weakness. Joy
heals, care wastes away, and both may kill. The
influence which <q>blood</q> and <q>bile</q> or any other predisposition
may have upon temperament and character
can be obviated or modified through education, or
transformed and guided into new channels through
strong psychical impressions and experiences, most of
all by great experiences in the domain of morals and
religion. No one doubts the reality of those great
internal revolutions of which religion is well aware,
which arise purely from the mind, and are able to rid us
of all natural bonds and burdens. This mysterious
region of the influence of the mind in modifying bodily
states or producing new ones is in these days being more
and more opened up. That grief can turn the hair grey
and disgust bring out eruptions on the skin has long
been known. But new and often marvellous facts are
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
being continually added to our knowledge through
curious experiments with suggestion, hypnosis, and
auto-suggestion. And we are no longer far from believing
that through exaltations, forced states of mind
associated with auto-suggestion, many phenomena,
such as <q>stigmata,</q> for instance, which have hitherto
been over hastily relegated to the domain of pious
legend, may possibly have a <q>scientific</q> background.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head><q>The Unconscious</q>.</head>

<p>
But one has a repugnance to descending into this
strange region. And religion, with its clear and lofty
mood, can never have either taste for or relationship
with considerations which so easily take an <q>occult</q>
turn. Nor is its mysticism concerned with physiologies.
But it is instructive and noteworthy that the old idealistic
faith, <q>It is the mind that builds up the body for
itself,</q> is becoming stronger again in all kinds of philosophies
and physiologies of <q>the unconscious,</q> as a
reaction from the onesidedness of the mechanistic
theories, and that it draws its chief support from the
dependence of nervous and other bodily processes upon
the psychical, which is being continually brought into
greater and greater prominence. The moderate and
luminous views of the younger Fichte, who probably
also first introduced the now current term <q>the unconscious,</q>
must be at least briefly mentioned. According
to him, the impulse towards the development of
form which is inherent in everything living, and which
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
builds up the organism from the germ to the complete
whole, by forcing the chemical and physical processes
into particular paths, is identical with the psychical
itself. In instincts, the unconscious purposive actions
of the lower animals in particular, he sees only a special
mode of this at first unconscious psychical nature, which,
building up organ after organ, makes use in doing so of
all the physical laws and energies, and is at first wholly
immersed in purely physiological processes. It is only
after the body has been developed, and presents a relatively
independent system capable of performing the
necessary functions of daily life, that it rises beyond
itself and gradually unfolds to conscious psychical life
in increasing self-realisation. Edward von Hartmann
has attempted to apply this principle of the unconscious
as a principle of all cosmic existence. And wherever,
among the younger generation of biologists, one has
broken away from the fascinations of the mechanistic
theory, he has usually turned to <q>psychical</q> co-operating
factors.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Is there Ageing of the Mind?</head>

<p>
Naturalism is also only apparently right in asserting
that the mind ages with the body. To learn the answer
which all idealism gives to this comfortless theory, it is
well to read Schleiermacher's <q>Monologues,</q> and especially
the chapter <q>Youth and Age.</q> The arguments
put forward by naturalism, the blunting of the senses,
the failing of the memory, are well known. But here
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
again there are luminous facts on the other side which
are much more true. It is no wonder that a mind ages
if it has never taken life seriously, never consolidated
itself to individual and definite being through education
and self-culture, through a deepening of morality, and
has gained for itself no content of lasting worth. How
could he do otherwise than become poor, dull and lifeless,
as the excitability of his organ diminishes and its
susceptibility to external impressions disappears? But
did Goethe become old? Did not Schleiermacher,
frail and ailing as he was by nature, prove the truth of
what he wrote in his youth, that there is no ageing of
the mind?
</p>

<p>
The whole problem, in its highest aspects, is a
question of will and faith. If I know mind and the
nature of mind, and believe in it, I believe with
Schleiermacher in eternal youth. If I do not believe
in it, then I have given away the best of all means for
warding off old age. For the mind can only hold itself
erect while trusting in itself. And this is the best
argument in the whole business.
</p>

<p>
But even against the concrete special facts and the
observable processes of diminution of psychical powers,
and of the disappearance of the whole mental content,
we could range other concrete and observable facts,
which present the whole problem in quite a different
light from that in which naturalism attempts to show
it. They indicate that the matter is rather one of the
rusting of the instrument to which the mind is bound
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
than an actual decay of the mind itself, and that it
is a withdrawing of the mind within itself, comparable
rather to sleep than to decay. The remarkable
power of calling up forgotten memories in hypnosis,
the suddenly re-awakening memory a few minutes before
death, in which sometimes the whole past life is unrolled
with surprising clearness and detail, the flaming up
anew of a rusty mind in moments of great excitement,
the great clearing up of the mind before its departure,
and many other facts of the same nature, are
rather to be regarded as signs that in reality the mind
never loses anything of what it has once experienced or
possessed. It has only become buried under the surface.
It has been withdrawn from the stage, but is stored up
in safe treasure-chambers. And the whole stage may
suddenly become filled with it again.
</p>

<p>
The simile of an instrument and the master who
plays upon it, which is often used of the relation
between body and mind, is in many respects a very
imperfect one; for the master does not develop with
and in his instrument. But in regard to the most
oppressive arguments of naturalism, the influence of
disease, of old age, of mental disturbances due to brain
changes, the comparison serves our turn well enough,
for undoubtedly the master is dependent upon his
instrument; upon an organ which is going more and more
out of tune, rusting, losing its pipes, his harmonies will
become poorer, more imperfect. And if we think of
the association between the two as further obstructed,
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
the master becoming deaf, the stops confused, the
relation between the notes and pipes altered, then what
may still live within him in perfect and unclouded
purity, and in undiminished richness, may present itself
outwardly as confused and unintelligible, may even find
only disconnected expression, and finally cease altogether;
so that no conclusion would be possible except
that the master himself had become different or poorer.
The melancholy field of mental diseases perhaps yields
proofs against naturalism to an even greater degree than
for it. It is by no means the case that all mental
diseases are invariably diseases of the brain, for even
more frequently they are real sicknesses of the mind,
which yield not to physical but to psychical remedies.
And the fact that the mind can be ill, is a sad but
emphatic proof that it goes its own way.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Immortality.</head>

<p>
It is in a faith in a Beyond, and in the immortality
of our true being, that what lies finely distributed
through all religion sums itself up and comes to full
blossoming: the certainty that world and existence are
insufficient, and the strong desire to break through into
the true being, of which at the best we have here only
a foretaste and intuition. The doctrine of immortality
stands by itself as a matter of great solemnity and
deep rapture. If it is to be talked about, both
speaker and hearers ought to be in an exalted mood.
It is the conviction which, of all religious convictions,
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
can be least striven for consciously; it must well forth
from devotional personal experience of the spirit and
its dignity, and thus can maintain itself without,
and indeed against much reasoning. To educate and
cultivate it in us requires a discipline of meditation,
of concentration, and of spiritual self-culture from within
outwards. If we understood better what it meant to
<q>live in the spirit,</q> to develop the receptivity, fineness,
and depth of our inner life, to listen to and cultivate what
belongs to the spirit, to inform it with the worth and
content of religion and morality, and to integrate it in
the unity and completeness of a true personality, we
should attain to the certainty that personal spirit is the
fundamental value and meaning of all the confused play
of evolution, and is to be estimated on quite a different
scale from all other being which is driven hither and
thither in the stream of Becoming and Passing away,
having no meaning or value because of which it
must endure. And it would be well also if we understood
better how to listen with keener senses to our
intuitions, to the direct self-consciousness of the spirit in
regard to itself, which sleeps in every mind, but which
few remark and fewer still interpret. Here, where the
gaze of self-examination reaches its horizon, and can
only guess at what lies beyond, but can no longer interpret
it, lie the true motives and reasons for our conviction
of immortality. An apologetic cannot do more than
clear away obstacles, nor need it do much more than
has hitherto been done. It reminds us, as we have
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
already seen, that the world which we know and study,
and which includes ourselves, does not show its true
nature to us; hidden depths lie behind appearances.
And it gathers together and sums up all the great
reasons for the independence and underivability of the
spiritual as contrasted with the corporeal. The spiritual
has revealed itself to us as a reality in itself, which cannot
be explained in terms of the corporeal, and which
has dominion over it. Its beginning and its end are
wholly unfathomable. There is no practical meaning
in discussing its <q>origin</q> or its <q>passing away,</q> as we
do with regard to the corporeal. Under certain
corporeal conditions it is there, it simply appears. But
it does not arise out of them. And as it is not nothing,
but an actual and effective reality, it can neither have
come out of nothing nor disappear into nothing again.
It appears out of the absolutely transcendental,
associates itself with corporeal processes, determines
these and is determined by them, and in its own time
passes back from this world of appearance to the transcendental
again. It is like a great unknown sea, that
pours its waters into the configuration of the shore and
withdraws them again. But neither the flowing in nor
the ebbing again is of nothing or in nothing. Whether
and how it retains the content, form, and structure
that it assumes in other spheres of animate and conscious
nature, when it retires into the transcendental
again; or whether it dissolves and breaks up into the
universal we do not know; nor do we attribute everlastingness
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
to those individual forms of consciousness which
we call animal souls. But of the self-conscious, personal
spirit religion knows that it is everlasting. It knows
this from its own sources. In its insight into the
underivability and autonomy of the spiritual it finds
warrant and freedom to maintain this knowledge as
something apart from or even in contrast to the general
outlook on the world.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. The World And God.</head>

<p>
The world and nature are marvellous in their being,
but they are not <q>divine</q>! The formula <q><foreign rend='italic'>natura sive
deus</foreign></q> is a monstrous misuse of the word
<q><foreign rend='italic'>deus</foreign>,</q> if we
are to use the words in the sense which history has
given to them. God is the Absolute Being, perfect,
wholly independent, resting in Himself, and necessary;
nature is entirely contingent and dependent, and at
every point of it we are impelled to ask <q>Why?</q> God
is the immeasurable fulness of Being, nature is
indeed diverse in the manifoldness of her productions,
but she is nevertheless limited, and her possibilities are
restricted within narrow limits. God is the unrestrained,
and everlasting omnipotence itself, and the perfect
wisdom; nature is indeed mighty enough in the attainment
of her ends, but how often is she obstructed, how
often does she fail to reach them, and how seldom does
she do so perfectly and without mistakes? She shows
wisdom, indeed, cunning in her products, subtlety and
daintiness, taste and beauty, all these often in an overwhelming
degree, yet just as often she brings forth what
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
is meaningless, contradictory and mutually hurtful,
traverses her own lines, and bewilders us by the
brutality, the thoughtlessness, and purposelessness, the
crookedness, incompleteness, and distortedness of her
operations. And what is true of the world of external
nature is true in a far greater degree of the world of
history. Nature is not a god, but a demigod, says
Aristotle. And on this, Pantheism with its creed,
<q><foreign rend='italic'>natura sive deus</foreign>,</q> makes shipwreck. The words of
this <foreign rend='italic'>credo</foreign> are either a mere tautology,
and <q><foreign rend='italic'>deus</foreign></q> is
misused as a new name for nature; or they are false.
It is not possible to transfer to nature and the world
all the great ideas and feelings which the religious mind
cherishes under the name of <q>God.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, nature is really, as Aristotle said,
δαιμονία, that is, strange, mysterious, and marvellous,
indicating God, and pointing, all naturalism and superficial
consideration notwithstanding, as we have seen, to
something outside of and beyond itself. Religion
demands no more than this. It does not insist upon
finding a solution for all the riddles of theoretical
world-lore. It is not distressed because the course of
nature often seems to our eyes confused, and to our
judgment contradictory and unintelligible at a hundred
places and in a hundred respects. On the contrary,
that this is the case is to religion in another aspect a
strong stimulus and corroboration. <q>The world is an
odd fellow; may God soon make an end of it,</q> said
Luther, and thus gave a crude but truly religious
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
parallel to the words of Aristotle, ἡ γἀρ φύσις
δαιμονία ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θεία, (Aristot. <q>De Divin. in Somn.,</q>
c. ii.). It is part of the very essence of religion,
as we have seen, to read in the pages of nature,
insufficiency, illusion, and perplexities, and to be
made thereby impatient and desirous of penetrating
to the true nature of things. Religion does not
claim to be directly deducible out of a consideration of
nature; it demands only the right and freedom to interpret
the world in its own way. And for this it is sufficient
that this world affords those hints and suggestions
for its convictions that we have seen it does afford. To
form clear ideas in regard to the actual relations of the
infinite to the finite, and of God to the world, and of
what religion calls creation, preservation, and eternal
providence, self-revelation in the world and in history,
is hardly the task of religion at all, but rather pertains
to our general speculative instinct, which can only
satisfy itself with the help of imagination. Attempts
of this kind have often been made. They are by no
means valueless, for even if no real knowledge can be
gained by this method, we may perhaps get an analogue
of it which will help us to understand existence and
phenomena, and to define our position, as well as to give
at least provisional answers to many pressing questions
(such, for instance, as the problem of theodicy).
</p>

<p>
If we study the world unprejudiced by the naturalistic
interpretation, or having shaken ourselves free from it,
we are most powerfully impressed by one fundamental
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
phenomenon in all existence: it is the fact of evolution.
It challenges attention and interpretation, and analogies
quickly reveal themselves which give something of the
same trend to all such interpretations. From stage to
stage existence advances onwards, from the world of large
masses subject only to the laws of mechanics, to the
delicately complex play of the forces of development in
growth and other vital processes. The nature of the
forces is revealed in ever higher expression, and at the
same time in ever more closely connected series of
stages. Even between the inorganic and the organic
there is an intermediate stage&mdash;crystal formation&mdash;which
is no longer entirely of the one, yet not of the
other. And in the organic world evolution reveals
itself most clearly of all; from the crudest and simplest
it presses onwards to the most delicate and complex.
In the corporeal as in the psychical, in the whole as in
each of its parts, there are ever higher stages, sometimes
far apart, sometimes close together. However we
picture to ourselves the way in which evolution accomplishes
itself in time, we can scarcely describe it without
using such expressions as <q>nature advances upwards
step by step,</q> <q>it presses and strives upwards and
unfolds itself stage by stage.</q>
</p>

<p>
And it is with us as it was with Plato; we inform the
world with a soul, with a desire and endeavour which
continually expresses itself in higher and higher forms.
And it is with us also as with Fichte; we speak of the
will which, unconscious of itself, pours itself forth in
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
unconscious and lifeless nature, and then on this foundation
strives forward, expressing its activity in ever
higher developments, breaking forth in life, sensation,
and desire, and finally coming to itself in conscious
existence and will. The whole world seems to us a
being which wills to become, presses restlessly forward,
and passes from the potential to the actual, realising
itself. And the height of its self-realisation is conscious,
willing life.
</p>

<p>
This outlook is lofty and significant, it supplies a
guiding clue by which the facts of life and nature can
be arranged. The religious outlook, too, when it
wishes to indulge in speculation, can make use of this
guiding thread. It will then say: God established
the world as <q>a will to existence, to consciousness, to
spirit.</q> He established it, not as complete, but as
becoming. He does not build it as a house, but plants
it, like a flower, in the seed, that it may grow, that it
may struggle upwards stage by stage to fuller existence,
aspiring with toil and endeavour towards the height
where, in the image of the Creator, as a free and
reasonable spirit capable of personality, it may realise
the aim of its being. Thus the world is <emph>of</emph> God, that
is, its rudiments came from God, and it is <emph>to</emph> God, in
the purpose of likeness to God. And it is imbued
with the breath of Godhead which moves in it and
impels it onwards, with the logos of the everlasting
Zeus of whom Cleanthes sings, with the spirit of
Jehovah whom Isaiah and the Psalmist praise, and
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
whom the poet of the Creation figuratively paints; the
divine breath is in everything that lives, from grass to
flower, from animal to man. But it is implanted as
becoming. And in regard to this, religion can say of
the whole world what it says of man. For man, too,
is not given as a finished product, either as regards the
genus or the individual, but as a rudiment, with his
destiny to work out, in historical becoming, by realising
what is inherent in him. We call this freedom. And
an adumbration of such freedom, which is the aim of
self-realisation, would help us to penetrate deeply into
the nature of things. Many riddles and apparent
contradictions could be fitted in with this view of
things: the unity of the world, and yet the gradations;
the relationship of all living creatures, the unity of all
psychical life, and yet the uniqueness of the rational
spirit; causal concatenation, yet guidance by means of
the highest ideas and purposes; the tentativeness,
illogicalness, and ineffectiveness of nature, unconsciously
pressing forward along uncertain paths, yet the directness
and purposefulness of the main lines of evolution
in general. This God-awakened will to be lies at the
roots of the mysteries of development in all living
creatures, of the unconscious purposiveness of instinctive
action, of the gradually ascending development of
psychical life and its organ. Operating in crystals and
plants purely as a formative impulse and <q>entelechy,</q>
it awakes in the bodies of animals more and more as
<q>soul.</q> Then it awakes fully in man, and in him, in
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
an entirely new phase of real free development, it
builds itself up to spirit. It resembles a stream whose
waves flow casually and transiently in animal consciousness,
and are soon withdrawn again, to break forth
anew at another place, in the personal spirit, where
they attain to permanent indissoluble form, since they
have now at last attained to self-realisation, and fulfilled
the purpose of all cosmic existence, the reflecting of the
eternal personality in the creature. But it is only in
human history that what was prepared for in natural
evolution is completed.
</p>

<p>
The riddle of theodicy thus becomes easier, for what
surrounds us in nature and history has not come direct
from the hand of eternal wisdom, but is in the first
place the product of the developing, striving world,
which only gradually and after many mistakes and
failures works out what is inherent in it as eternal idea
and aim. We see and blame its mistakes, for instance
in our own human structure. We see the deficiencies in
the historical course of things. But when we find fault
we do not see that evolution and self-realisation and
freedom are more worthy of praise than ready-made
existence incapable of independent action.
</p>

<p>
This principle of development, wherever it is regarded
as <q>world-soul</q> or as <q>will</q> or as the <q>unconscious,</q>
is frequently, through pantheism and the doctrine of
immanence, made equivalent with the object of religion,
with God. This is an impossible undertaking. We
cannot worship what only reaches its full development
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
in ourselves. But that we <emph>can</emph> worship, and that it is
only in the feeling of complete dependence that the full
depth of what is developing within us to conscious life
reveals itself, proves better than anything else that God
is above all <q>World-will.</q> It was more than allegory
when Plato in Timæus set the <q>eternal father and
creator of the world</q> above all soul and psyche. And
it was religion that broke through when Fichte in his
little book, <q>Anweisung zum seeligen Leben,</q> set being
before becoming, and God above the creatures struggling
towards self-realisation. Religion knows in advance
that this is so. And calm reflection confirms it. All
that we have already learnt of the dependence, conditionedness,
and contingent nature of the world is
equally true of a world <q>evolving itself</q> out of its
potentiality, of a will to existence, and of an unconscious
realising itself. No flower can grow and develop
without being first implicit in the seed. Nothing can
attain to <q>actuality,</q> to realisation, that was not
potentially implied in the beginning. But who originated
the seed of the world-flower? Who enclosed
within it the <q>tendencies,</q> the <q>rudiments</q> which
realise themselves in evolution? Invariably <q>the actual
is before the potential</q> and Being before Becoming.
A world could only become if it were called to become
by an everlasting Being. God planting the world-flower
that it might radiate forth in its blossoms His
own image and likeness, is an allegory which may well
symbolise for religion the relation between God and the
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
world. And thus it is possible to draw the outline of
a religious outlook on the world, into which the results
of world-lore could well be fitted. This frame was
constructed by Plato on the basis of a religious study
of things, and after Plato it was first definitely outlined
in Fichte's too much forgotten but unforgettable books
<q>Bestimmung des Menschen</q> and <q>Anweisung zum
seeligen Leben,</q> and it is thus a new creation of the
great German idealism and its mighty faith. And it is
not easy to see why it should be abandoned, why we
should give it up in favour of an irreligious, semi-naturalistic
outlook on the world.
</p>

<p>
One thing, however, must be kept constantly in mind:
even such an interpretation of the world as this is
poetry, not knowledge. There is a poetry of the will
to live, of the unconscious, which is struggling towards
existence, but there is no philosophy. There are only
analogies and hints of what goes on at the foundations
of the world. In particular, the unconscious
creative impulse in all living organisms, this <q>will</q>
towards form, its relationship with instinct and the
relationship of instinct to conscious psyche, afford us
a step-ladder of illustrations, and an illustration of
the step-ladder of the <q>will towards existence,</q> which
invite us to overstep the bounds of our knowledge, and
indulge in our imagination. We can say nothing of
pre-conscious consciousness and will, we can at best
only make guesses about them. We cannot think
definitely of a general world-will, which wills and
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
aspires in individual beings; we cannot picture to
ourselves the emergence of the individual <q>souls</q> of
animals and man from a universal psyche. Imagination
plays a larger part here than clear thinking. And for
our present purpose it must be clearly borne in mind that
religion does not require any speculative construction of
theories of the world. But <q>you shall know that it is
your imagination which creates the world for you.</q><note place='foot'>Schleiermacher,
<q>Reden über die Religion,</q> ii.</note> And
if a speculative construction be desired, it will always
be most easily attained along these lines, and will in
this way come nearest to our modern knowledge of
nature. We must remember, too, that the objections
which may be urged against this form of speculation
are equally applicable against any other. For the
origin of the individual psyche, the graduated series of
its forms, the development of one after the other, and
of that of the child from that of its parents, are riddles
which cannot be solved by any speculative thinking.
Monadology, theories of the pre-existence of the soul,
creationism, or the current traducianism&mdash;which to-day,
with its partly or wholly materialistic basis, is just as
naïve as the older&mdash;all reveal equal darkness. But the
speculation we have hinted at, if it gives no explanation,
at least supplies a framework for many questions which
attract us, and do so even from the point of view of
religion: for instance the collective, diffuse, and almost
divisible nature of consciousness in the lower stages, its
increasing and ever more strict centralisation, the natural
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
relationship of the psychical in man to the psychical in
general, and yet its incommensurability and superiority
to all the world.
</p>

<p>
But let us once more turn from all the poetical and
imaginative illustrations of the relation of God to the
world, which can at best be only provisional, and only
applicable at certain points, to the more general aspect
of the problem. Religion itself consists in this:
believing and experiencing that in time the Eternal, in
the finite the Infinite, in the world God is working,
revealing Himself, and that in Him lies the reason and
cause of all being. For this it has names like creation,
providence, self-revelation of God in the world, and it
lives by the mysteries which are indicated under these
names. The mysteries themselves it recognises in vague
or naïve forms of conception long before it attempts
any definite formulation. If dogmatics begin with the
latter, some form or other of the stiff and wooden
doctrines of <foreign rend='italic'>concursus</foreign>, of
<foreign rend='italic'>influxus ordinarius</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>extraordinarius</foreign>
usually develops with many other subtleties,
which are nothing more than attempts to formulate the
divine influence in finite terms, and to think of it as a
force along with other forces. Two series of causes are
usually distinguished; the system of causes and effects
within the world, according to which everything
natural takes place, the <q><foreign rend='italic'>causæ secundariæ</foreign></q>; and in
addition to these the divine causality co-operating and
influencing the others, ordering them with gentle and
delicate pressure, and guiding them towards their true
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
end, and which may also reveal itself as
<q><foreign rend='italic'>extraordinaria</foreign></q>
in miracles and signs. This double operation is regarded
as giving rise to all phenomena, and in it consists
guidance, dispensation, providence, and natural revelation.
</p>

<p>
This kind of conception is extremely primitive, and is
unfavourable to religion itself, for in it mystery is done
away with and arranged according to rubric, and everything
has become quite <q>simple.</q> Moreover, this doctrine
has a necessary tendency to turn into the dreaded
<q>Deism.</q> According to the deistic view, God made the
world in the beginning, and set the system of natural
causes in motion, in such a way that no farther assistance
was given, and everything went on of itself. This theory
is incredibly profane, and strikes God out of the world,
and nature, and history at a single stroke, substituting
for Him the course of a well-arranged system of clockwork.
But the former theory is a very unsatisfactory
and doubtful makeshift as compared with that of deism,
for it is impossible to see why, if God arranged these
<foreign rend='italic'>causæ secundariæ</foreign>, He should have made them so weak
and ineffective that they need all these ingenious
<foreign rend='italic'>concursus</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>influxus</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>determinationes</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>gubernationes</foreign>, and
the like. Both theories are crude fabrications of the
dogmatists, and they have nothing left in them of the
piety they were intended to protect, nor do they become
any better in this respect, however many attempts are
made to define them. Religion possesses, without the
aid of any stilted and artificial theories, all the things
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
we have named above, and especially and most directly
the last of them, namely, the experience of the revelation
and communication of the Divine in the great developments
and movements of spiritual and religious history.
And it finds its corroboration and justification and
freedom not by way of dogmatics but of criticism. It is
impossible to distinguish artificially two sets of causes,
and to give to the world what is alleged to be of the
world, and to God what is alleged to be of God. But it
is permissible to point to the insufficiency of our causal
study in general, and to the limits of our knowledge.
Even when we have established it as a fact that all
phenomena are linked together in a chain of causes we
are still far from having discovered how things actually
come to pass. Every qualitative effect and change is
entirely hidden from us as far as the cause of its coming
about and its real and inner nature are concerned.
Every effect which in kind or quantity goes beyond its
cause (and we cannot make anything of the domain of
living forms, of the psychical and of history without
these), shows us that we are still only at the surface.
Indeed, even mechanical action, often alleged to be
entirely intelligible, such as the transference or transformation
of energy, is, as we have seen, a complete
riddle. In addition, all causality runs its course in time,
and therefore partakes of all the defects and limitations
of our views of time. And finally we are guided by the
Kantian antinomy regarding the conditions of what is
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
<q>given.</q> It destroys the charm of the <q>purely causal</q>
point of view by showing that this in itself cannot be
made complete and is therefore contradictory. Moreover,
in the phenomena of life, and in the fact that consciousness
and will control our corporeal processes, and
yet can hardly be thought of as a cause <q>co-operating</q>
with other causes, we found an analogy, if a weak and
obscure one, of the relation that a divine teleology and
governing of the world may bear to mundane phenomena.
Thus mystery remains in all its strength and is not replaced
by the surrogate of a too simple and shallow
dogmatic theory. In confessing mystery and resting
content with it we are justified by reflection on the
nature and antinomy of our knowledge.
</p>

<p>
All this is true also of what religion means by creation.
In the feeling of complete humility, in its experience of
absolute dependence and conditionedness, the creature
becomes conscious of itself as a creature, and experiences
with full clearness what it means to be a <q>creature</q>
and <q>created.</q> The dogmatic theory is here again only
a surrogate of mystery. And again critical self-reflection
proves a better guide than any theory of creation,
which is quite in its place as a means of expression
in religious discourse and poetry, but is quite insufficient
as true knowledge. That we must but cannot
think of this world either as beginning or as not-beginning
is the analogue in knowledge of what religion
experiences in mystery; and that this contingent and
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
conditioned world is founded in everlasting, necessary,
true Being, is the analogue of what religion possesses
and knows through devout feeling, more directly and
clearly than by any thinking, of the relations of God to
the world.
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
